HI, LET ME KNOW
THAT THERE ARE COPIES OF YEAH,
THERE ARE RECORDING IN PROGRESS
ON EACH SIDE OF THE DAIS AND
WHEN YOU COME TO SPEAK AND THIS
IS YOUR FIRST TIME SPEAKING,
THERE ARE PRETTY LIGHTS THAT
WILL INDICATE THERE'S A GREEN
LIGHT.
YOU KNOW, THERE'S A YELLOW
LIGHT STARTS TO BACK UP BRIGHT
LIGHTS.
WE STOP AND GRAB YOUR LIGHTS
AND THEN WE GENERALLY DON'T
ANSWER DIRECT QUESTIONS FROM
CONGRESS BECAUSE IT'S MORE
PUBLIC TIME THOUGH AFTER THE
PUBLIC COMMENT SECTION YOU WILL
PROVIDE AN OPPORTUNITY FOR
COMMISSIONER TO RESPOND TO
ANYTHING THAT THEY HEARD THAT
THEY'D LIKE TO ADDRESS OFTEN
WHEN SHE MADE HER COMMENT.
MAYBE SO YOU MAY NOT ACTUALLY
HEAR A RESPONSE TO THE COMMENTS
THAT YOU HAVE MADE REPUBLICANS
SO THAT MR. VICE CHAIR YOUR
MICROPHONE IS OFF.
I'M GOING TO CALL THE MEETING
TO ORDER.
WELCOME TO THE TUESDAY, MAY SIX
TWENTY TWENTY FIVE REGULAR
MEETING OF THE NARBERTH
PLANNING COMMISSION FOR
DETAILED MEETING INFORMATION
AND PROCEDURES PLEASE REVIEW
THE FULL PRINTED AGENDA
PROVIDER MANAGER KELLY WILL YOU
PLEASE CALL THE ROLL NOTING
THAT SHIRLEY WILL BE ABSENT
THIS EVENING, COMMISSIONER
WISCH YOUR COMMISSIONER
HAMMERSCHMIDT COMMISSIONER
ABRAMS HERE COUNCIL MEMBER IS
HERE, COMMISSIONER MILLS HERE.
COMMISSIONER, WHETHER WE HEAR
COMMISSIONER ADAMS OR
COMMISSIONER NORTON YOU HAVE A
QUORUM.
THANK YOU.
WE HAVE A MOTION TO APPROVE THE
AGENDA MOVE BY COMMISSIONER
ABRAMS SECONDED BY COUNCIL
MEMBER ALL THOSE IN FAVOR
PLEASE SAY HI TO OPPOSE THE
MOTION CARRIES ME.
I HAVE A MOTION TO APPROVE THE
MINUTES OF THE APRIL 29TH.
TWENTY TWENTY FIVE MEETING MOVE
BY COMMISSIONER MILLS SECONDED
BY COMMISSIONER WHETHER IT BE
ALL THOSE IN FAVOR EXCUSE IS
THERE ANY DISCUSSION OF THE
MINUTES SEEING NONE OF THOSE IN
FAVOR.
PLEASE VOTE BY SAYING I OPPOSE
THE MOTION CARRIES NEXT STOP
THE REPORTS TO THE PLANNING
COMMISSION AND WRITTEN
COMMUNICATIONS WILL START WITH
COUNCIL MEMBER DISH.
>> YES WELL LAST NIGHT AT
COUNCIL WE APPROVED THE TWO
STONE SCHOOL REZONING AND
COUNCIL APPROVED THE CHANGES TO
WAS THAT A FUN FIRST READING OR
SECOND READING THE PDF THINK
WAS FIRST WAS A FIRST OK SO WE
PASSED ON FIRST READING THE
ADJUSTMENTS THAT WE MADE SO
THAT PDS COULD COULD ALLOW
CHANGES FOR ONE MEMBER OF THE
ASSOCIATION OR ZONING DISTRICT
AND WE DID ONE MORE THING THE
TWELVE ON THE UNIVERSITY
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT WAS
APPROVED THE GREEN NATURE AREA
EXPANSION REZONING HAS FIRST
READING THE DOWNTOWN LIBRARY
PASSED FIRST READING AS WELL.
YEAH THANK YOU.
COUNCIL MEMBER DISH WILL NOW
HAVE THE MANAGER REPORT BY
MANAGER KELLY I WOULD LIKE TO
FIRST KNOW THAT STAFF ARE
RECOMMENDING CANCELATION FOR
THE FIVE TWENTY SEVEN ORDINANCE
REVISIONS COMMITTEE BOTH SO
THAT THEY CAN CONTINUE TO WORK
ON PROGRESS TO BICYCLE PARKING
ORDINANCE AND A SEPARATE EFFORT
TO HOPEFULLY BRING THE
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION BACK
BEFORE YOU AND INCLUDE THE
DEVELOPER SIGNAGE REQUIREMENT.
WE'RE WE'RE JUST IN THE
BEGINNING STAGES OF THAT BUT WE
WOULD LIKE TO MEET AT THE NEXT
SUBSEQUENTLY SCHEDULED MEETING
WHICH I BELIEVE WOULD BE IN
JULY AND IT IS POSSIBLE THAT
MANAGER LEONARD AND PLANNER
BENNETT WILL USE THE FIVE
TWENTY SEVEN TIME SLOT FOR
ADDITIONAL COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
DISCUSSIONS.
THEY'RE PENDING THE OUTCOME
OF TONIGHT AND NEXT TUESDAY'S
MEETING.
SO IF YOU WOULD LIKE TO JUST
NOTE TO HOLD EVEN IF YOU ARE
NOT ON THE ORDINANCE PROVISIONS
COMMITTEE FOR THAT PURPOSE WE
WOULD APPRECIATE IT.
ADDITIONALLY, SECOND UPDATE FOR
PUBLIC OPEN HOUSES FOR THE
DRAFT COMPREHENSIVE PLAN OUR
NEXT AND FINAL SCHEDULED AT THE
MOMENT IS TOMORROW MAY SEVEN
FROM THREE TO SEVEN.
THE TRAILER WOULD LIBRARY
BRANCH.
THANK YOU.
ARE THERE ANY COMMISSIONER
OFFICERS OR COMMITTEE LIAISONS
WHO HAVE ANYTHING TO REPORT
TONIGHT WRITTEN COMMUNICATIONS
ARE WERE INCLUDED IN TODAY'S
PACKAGE AND THAT WILL TAKE US
TO ITEM NUMBER SIX ON OUR
AGENDA PUBLIC COMMENT.
THIS IS AN OPPORTUNITY FOR
INDIVIDUAL TO SPEAK UP TO THREE
MINUTES ON ANY ISSUE NOT LISTED
AS A PUBLIC HEARING ON OUR
AGENDA THIS EVENING AFTER OUR
REGULAR BUSINESS WE WILL
CONTINUE OUR DISCUSSION OF THE
COMPREHENSIVE LAND USE PLAN
WITH CHAPTERS FIVE AND
POTENTIALLY CHAPTER SIX TO
START OUR PUBLIC COMMENT FOR
THIS EVENING, WE WILL FIRST
HEAR FROM THOSE WHO ARE PRESENT
IN THE CHAMBERS, THEN REMOTE
PARTICIPANTS TO SPEAK REMOTELY
OR PRESS STAR NINE LIVE ON
PHONE OR USE THE RACE HAND
FEATURED THEM FOR PHONE ACCESS
CALL ONE EXCUSE ME ONE EIGHT
SEVEN SEVEN EIGHT FIVE THREE
FIVE TO FOUR SEVEN AND IN OUR
MEETING IT'S NINE SEVEN SEVEN
SIX SIX THREE FOUR ONE TWO TWO
SIX CITY STAFF IDENTIFIED
CALLERS BY THE LAST THREE
DIGITS OF THEIR PHONE NUMBER OR
BY THEIR NAME FOR ZOOME USERS
YOU WILL HEAR AN ANNOUNCEMENT
WHEN IT'S YOUR TURN TO SPEAK
PLEASE MOVE TO A QUIET AREA AND
MUTE ANY BACKGROUND NOISE FOR
ALL PARTICIPANTS.
PLEASE STATE YOUR NAME AND
ADDRESS AT THE BEGINNING
OF YOUR COMMENT.
IS THERE ANYONE PRESENT IN THE
CHAMBERS WHO WOULD LIKE TO
SPEAK AT THIS TIME?
COME RIGHT DOWN.
>> THANKS OR MAKE SOME NOISE
ABOUT THIS ON GOOD MORNING OR
THIS AFTERNOON OR EVENING
WHATEVER I I DELIVERED A MEMO
TO CITY HALL THIS MORNING TO
EACH OF YOU ALERTING YOU TO
SERIOUS PROBLEMS IN THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
YOU SHOULD HAVE IT IN YOUR
PACKET AS WELL AND WE JUST
SUBMITTED A COPY WE SPENT MANY
HOURS ON THE RESEARCH THAT'S IN
A MEMO BECAUSE WE CARE ABOUT
OUR COMMUNITY LIKE YOU DO.
WE WANT TO PLAN FOR OUR CITY
THAT STARTS WITH CORRECTLY
SOURCE DATA AND ACCURATE
NUMBERS.
WE WANT A PLAN THAT'S BASED ON
ROBUST PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT.
WE WANT A PLAN THAT DOES NOT
LEAVE OUT CRUCIAL TOPICS.
ALL OF THESE POINTS SUMMED UP
IN THAT MEMO AND I ASK YOU TO
READ IT I KNOW IT'S LONG
CENTRAL TO ANY COMPREHENSIVE
PLAN IS THE UNDERLYING RESEARCH
IN CONTRAST TO THE AMERICAN
PLANNING ASSOCIATION
GUIDELINES, THE PLAN THE DRAFT
PLAN CONTAINS NO POPULATION
PROJECTION METHODOLOGY FOR ITS
PROPOSALS.
WE WERE SURPRISED TO SEE THAT
SIMCOCK DATA IS NOT USED IN THE
PLAN.
HERE'S ONE EXAMPLE THE PLAN
PROCEEDS FROM THE ASSUMPTION IT
FROM SIXTY THREE THOUSAND TO
ONE HUNDRED AND TWELVE THOUSAND
FIVE HUNDRED NEW RESIDENTS WILL
MOVE TO AN AREA BETWEEN NOW AND
2050.
THAT MEANS THE CITY WILL NUMBER
BETWEEN ONE HUNDRED EIGHTY SIX
THOUSAND TWO HUNDRED AND THIRTY
SIX THOUSAND RESIDENTS.
I UNDERSTAND THAT A GROUP
OF REALTORS HEARD FROM PLANNING
STAFF THIS MORNING THAT THEY
ARE HOPING FOR TWO HUNDRED AND
THIRTY SIX THOUSAND THESE
GROWTH ASSUMPTIONS ARE
UNSUPPORTED BY ANY DATA SET
COGS TWENTY FIFTY REGIONAL
DEVELOPMENT FORECAST PROJECTS
THAT AN ARBOR'S POPULATION WILL
GROW TO ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTY
FIVE THOUSAND EIGHT HUNDRED BY
2050 AN INCREASE OF NINE POINT
SIX PERCENT OVER THE TWENTY
TWENTY BASE YEAR I HEARD
ANOTHER COMMENT WAS MADE THIS
MORNING THAT SIMCOCK DATA IS AN
ACCURATE WELL IF YOU BELIEVE
THAT THE DATA IS NOT ACCURATE
THEN TELL US WHAT DATA IS
ACCURATE.
THE PUBLIC HAS PAID SEVEN
HUNDRED THOUSAND DOLLARS FOR
THIS PLANNING PROCESS SO FAR WE
EXPECTED A HIGHER STANDARD
OF WORK THAN WHAT WE SEE IN THE
DRAFT PLAN.
AT THE VERY LEAST WE EXPECTED
REALITY.
WE HOPE YOU WILL SUSPEND THE
PROCESS CORRECTING ERRORS AND
OMISSIONS BOTH IN PROCESS AND
IN SUBSTANCE.
WE ASK THAT YOU PLEASE ADD THIS
MEMO THAT MEMO TO THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN WEBSITE SO
THE PUBLIC CAN SEE OUR NUMBERS
AND MAKE THEIR OWN DECISIONS.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
>> HI I'M LISA JAVINS.
I LIVE AT TEN FIFTY FOUR AM
MARTIN PLACE.
I ALSO PARTICIPATED IN THE
WRITING THE MEMO THAT MR. BARRY
REFERENCED.
>> I'M PARTICULARLY CONCERNED
THAT THE PLAN DOES NOT COMPLY
WITH THE RFP PROPOSAL AND
CONTRACT WITH THE CONSULTING
FIRM INTERFACE STUDIOS'.
THIS CONTRACT REQUIRES A
COMPLETE DATA DRIVEN
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN THAT ADHERES
TO MICHIGAN LAW AND THE
AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF CERTIFIED
PLANNERS STANDARDS.
WE DO NOT THINK THAT IT DOES.
THE PLAN CERTAINLY DOES NOT
FOLLOW THE GUIDELINES SET FORTH
BY THE AMERICAN PLANNING
ASSOCIATION'S MANUAL ENTITLED
SUSTAINING PLACES BEST
PRACTICES FOR COMPREHENDS
OF PLANS.
I THINK WE HAVE A COPY OF THAT
HERE IF YOU WOULD LIKE TO SEE
AFTER WE'RE DONE SPEAKING.
>> FURTHERMORE, THE PLAN FAILS
TO MEET THE REQUIREMENTS OF THE
MICHIGAN PLANNING ENABLING ACT
OF TWO THOUSAND EIGHT SECTION
THIRTY THREE.
THIS REQUIRES THE PLANS INCLUDE
STRATEGIES FOR PROVIDING QUOTE
A RANGE OF HOUSING TYPES COSTS
AFFORDABILITY ATTAINABLE AGES
AND OTHER CHARACTERISTICS
INCLUDING SINGLE FAMILY HOMES,
MULTIPLE FAMILY DWELLINGS TO
SERVE THE HOUSING DEMANDS OF A
DIVERSE POPULATION.
AS MR. BERRY STATED, WE EXPECT
A HIGHER
STANDARD OF WORK THAN
WHAT WE ARE CURRENTLY SEEING IN
THE DRAFT PLAN.
ALL OF US DESERVE A PLAN AT
LEAST COMPARABLE TO WHAT THIS
CONSULTING FIRM PROVIDED TO
OTHER CITIES LIKE GRAND RAPIDS
AND BALTIMORE WHICH WE HAVE
REVIEWED.
WE HOPE THAT YOU WILL SUSPEND
THIS PROCESS AND CORRECT THE
EGREGIOUS ERRORS AND OMISSIONS
IN THE DRAFT PLAN.
PLEASE CONSULT THE FOLLOWING
AND FOLLOW PLANNING STANDARDS
AND STATE LAW.
WE WOULD REALLY LIKE TO GET A
PLAN THAT APPLIES TO ANN ARBOR
AS IT IS AND NOT TO AN
IMAGINARY FUTURE.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
MY NAME IS ELLEN LYNN.
I LIVE AT THIRTEEN TWENTY ONE
FOREST COURT IN ANN ARBOR.
>> OUR PLAN IS ONLY AS GOOD AS
THE ASSUMPTIONS ON WHICH IT IS
BASED.
THE PROPOSED ANN ARBOR
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN MAKES FAULTY
ASSUMPTIONS ABOUT THE FUTURE
GROWTH OF AN URBAN POPULATION.
>> IT CLAIMS THAT OUR
POPULATION WILL GROW BY SOME 60
PERCENT IN THE NEXT 30 YEARS.
THE SOUTHEAST MICHIGAN COUNCIL
OF GOVERNMENT SIMCOCK, THE
PREMIER ORGANIZATION FOR
PREDICTING AND CHARTING
POPULATION GROWTH AND THE ONE I
WAS REQUIRED TO USE IN MY
PROFESSIONAL WORK PREDICTS ONLY
A MODEST POPULATION GROWTH
OF NINE POINT SIX PERCENT.
>> IN OTHER WORDS, THE PROPOSED
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN INFLATES THE
SAME COGGS TRUSTWORTHY
PREDICTION BY ALMOST 600
PERCENT.
IN REALITY THE POPULATION
OF ANN ARBOR DECREASED BY ONE
POINT FIVE PERCENT FROM FROM
2020 TO 2024 ACCORDING TO SOME
AND SOME CODE PREDICTS ANOTHER
THREE POINT SIX PERCENT
DECREASE IN AN IRISH POPULATION
OVER THE NEXT THREE YEARS.
THESE DOWNWARD TREND WERE
PREDICTED BEFORE THE TRUMP
ADMINISTRATION TOOK OFFICE AND
CUT MAJOR FUNDING FOR
SCIENTIFIC ESPECIALLY HEALTH
RELATED RESEARCH.
A MAJOR PART OF OUR LOCAL
ECONOMY.
THESE CUTS WILL SURELY DECREASE
THE NUMBER OF JOBS IN ANN ARBOR
AND WILL CAUSE MANY PEOPLE TO
LEAVE THE AREA.
>> I CAN ONLY THINK OF ONE
REASON THAT THE CITY IS SO
WRONG IN ITS FUNDAMENTAL
ESTIMATES OF FUTURE POPULATION
GROWTH AND THAT IS TO APPEASE
THE BUILDERS AND DEVELOPERS WHO
WILL REAP FINANCIAL BENEFITS
FROM THIS PLAN IF IT GOES INTO
EFFECT.
I URGE YOU TO STOP IT NOW.
THANK YOU.
>> GOOD EVENING COMMISSIONERS.
MY NAME IS HIROMI MEYER.
I LIVE AT TWO EIGHT ZERO NINE
BROCKMANN BOULEVARD IN THE 3RD
WARD.
I'D LIKE TO FOLLOW ON THE OTHER
COMMENTS THAT YOU'VE HEARD THE
MEMO THAT YOU RECEIVED TONIGHT
AND TALK TO YOU ABOUT
EMPLOYMENT, THE EMPLOYMENT
PROJECTIONS THAT ARE IN THE
PLAN.
THIS DRAFT PLAN PRESENTS A JOBS
GROWTH PICTURE THAT IS NOT
BASED ON EVIDENCE AND FACT.
THE PLAN CLAIMS THAT EMPLOYMENT
IN THE CITY WILL INCREASE BY
30000 TO 50000 JOBS BY TWENTY
TWENTY FIVE TWENTY FIFTY RATHER
WE ASK THAT THE PLAN BE PAUSED
BECAUSE THIS CLAIM IS NOT
SUPPORTED BY THE FACTS.
THE PLAN OFFERS NO EVIDENCE FOR
THIS KIND OF RAPID JOB GROWTH
NOR DOES IT INCLUDE A WORKABLE
STRATEGY TO CREATE ALL THESE
NEW JOBS.
ITS ASSUMPTIONS DIRECTLY
CONTRADICT CURRENT EMPLOYMENT
TRENDS FROM SIMCOCK AND THEY
IGNORE THE FINANCIAL PRESSURES
NOW FACING THE UNIVERSITY
OF MICHIGAN.
ANN ARBOR IS LARGEST EMPLOYER
WHILE REGIONAL JOB GROWTH HAS
BEEN MODEST, IT'S NOWHERE NEAR
ENOUGH TO SUPPORT A 60 PERCENT
POPULAR INCREASE AT SIMCOCK
PROJECTS JUST A LITTLE OVER
EIGHTEEN THOUSAND NEW JOBS IN
ANN ARBOR BY TWENTY FIFTY.
THAT'S A 14 PERCENT INCREASE
FROM TWENTY TWENTY.
MEANWHILE, MICHIGAN RECENTLY
RANKED NEAR THE BOTTOM IN
NATIONAL UNEMPLOYMENT.
THE PLAN OVERLOOKS RELIABLE
DATA AND FAILS TO OUTLINE A
REALISTIC PATH FOR SUSTAINABLE
ECONOMIC GROWTH.
YET THIS PROJECTED GROWTH IS
USED TO SUPPORT THE CHANGES IN
THE LAND USE PLAN.
LET'S PASS THE PLAN AND FOCUS
THE ATTENTION OF ALL RESIDENTS
ON HOW TO PLAN FOR A
SUSTAINABLE ECONOMIC FUTURE.
THANK YOU.
THANK
IN TOWN STALBERG.
I NEVER WANT TO ZERO TO
TRAVERSE STREET IN THE HEART
OF LOWER TOWN.
YOU KNOW ME AS A REALTOR, A
DEVELOPER, A LANDLORD AND IS A
STAUNCH ADVOCATE FOR AFFORDABLE
HOUSING AND FOR ATTAINABLE
HOUSING.
AS YOU'VE HEARD THIS PLAN
ESTIMATES THE CITY WILL NEED
BETWEEN THIRTY THOUSAND FORTY
FIVE THOUSAND HOUSING UNITS BY
2050.
BUT THIS IS WHOLLY AT VARIANCE
WITH SIMCOCK STATA BASED AND
MORE REALISTIC PROJECTION.
I'M SORRY THAT THE CITY WILL
ADD ABOUT FORTY SEVEN HUNDRED
HOUSEHOLDS BY 2050, ACCORDING
TO SIMCOCK.
THE PLAN OFFERS NOMEN
METHODOLOGY FOR REACHING THESE
INFLATED HOUSING NEEDS
ASSESSMENTS.
IT ALSO FAILS TO MENTION OR
ACCOUNT FOR HOUSING PLAN TO BE
BUILT BY THE UNIVERSITY
OF MICHIGAN AND ITS CAMPUS PLAN
OF TWENTY FIFTY.
I WROTE YOU BRIEFLY THIS
EVENING ABOUT THAT IT'S IN YOUR
PACKET LAST WEEK'S EDIT AT THIS
BODIES MEETING SEEMED
DISMISSIVE OF YOU OF TWENTY
FIFTY PLAN YET THAT PLAN SHOWS
THE UNIVERSITY'S INTENT TO
BUILD A SIGNIFICANT AMOUNT
OF HOUSING AND PROPERTY THAT IT
ALREADY OWNS FOR STUDENTS AND
FOR ITS WORKERS.
THE UNIVERSITY ADDED ABOUT
TWELVE THOUSAND NEW STUDENTS IN
ABOUT FIFTEEN YEARS WHICH
REALLY SKEWED OUR PRIVATE
HOUSING MARKET.
THERE'S NO DOUBT ABOUT THAT.
THE USE PLAYING CATCH UP NOW IT
WOULD HAVE BEEN BETTER IF
THEY'D DONE IT EARLIER BUT THEY
HAVE PLANS NOW WE HAVE TO TAKE
THEIR PLANS INTO ACCOUNT IN THE
COMPREHENSIVE LAND USE PLAN IF
THEY'RE PLANNING ON BUILDING A
LOT OF HOUSING THAT WILL HELP
TO RECTIFY THE PROBLEM THAT
THEY CREATED AND BUILDING IT ON
THEIR LAND.
I KNOW THAT ISN'T PART OF OUR
MAPS BUT WE HAVE TO TAKE INTO
ACCOUNT IN OUR PLAN BECAUSE A
SIGNIFICANT AMOUNT OF HOUSING
AND THAT'S WHAT HAS SKEWED OUR
MARKET SO DRAMATICALLY.
THE POPULATION OF BANABA
OUTSIDE OF THE STUDENT
POPULATION IS ACTUALLY
DECLINING.
THE PROPOSED COMPREHENSIVE LAND
USE PLAN WILL NOT RESULT IN A
TANGIBLY PRICED HOUSING.
IT SIMPLY WILL NOT IT'S GOING
TO ADD MORE EXPENSIVE HOUSING.
THERE'S BEEN THEORIES ABOUT HOW
THAT MIGHT TRICKLE DOWN.
IT'S NOT GOING TO WORK.
THE PEOPLE WHO NEED ATTAINABLE
PRICED HOUSING WILL BE DRIVEN
INTO THE TOWNSHIPS.
THE DEVELOPERS KNOW THAT THE
VERY SAME DEVELOPERS THAT ARE
BUILDING WITHIN OUR CITY
BOUNDARIES AT THE EDGES ARE
BUILDING THE TOWNSHIPS THEY
CALL IT THE GREATER ANN ARBOR
AREA.
IT GOES TO GRAYSLAKE, IT GOES
TO HAMBRICK.
IT'S CONSIDERED A REASONABLE
COMMUTING DISTANCE WITHIN A
HALF HOUR OF ANN ARBOR.
THAT'S WHERE OUR ATTAINABLE
PRICED HOUSING WILL BE FOR OUR
COMMUNITY IF WE DON'T WORK INTO
THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
SOMETHING THAT WILL ADDRESS
DIRECT MEASURES TO ACHIEVE
ATTAINABLE PRICED HOUSING OR
FOR RENT AND FOR OWNERSHIP.
SO PLEASE GIVE THE INADEQUACY
OF THE DATA AND THE FLOOR PLAN
PAUSE SO WE CAN DO IT RIGHT.
THANK YOU.
THANK YOU
.
GOOD EVENING.
I'M JOHN GODFREY.
I LIVE AT TWO AND TWENTY EIGHT
OR NINE BROCKMANN.
SO LET'S TALK ABOUT
INFRASTRUCTURE BECAUSE THE PLAN
DOESN'T IT SETS AMBITIOUS GOALS
TARGETS AS YOU'VE HEARD FOR NEW
HOUSING BUT SAYS ALMOST NOTHING
ABOUT HOW TO SUPPORT THE GROWTH
OF THE BASIC INFRASTRUCTURE
THAT WILL BE NEEDED.
THERE'S NO CLEAR ANALYSIS
OF THE COSTS TO UPGRADE OUR
AGING SYSTEMS THINGS LIKE
WATER, SEWER ROADS AND SOLID
WASTE BASED ON CITY DOCUMENTS
AND ON SIMCOCK DATA.
THE SOUTHEAST MICHIGAN COUNCIL
OF GOVERNMENT WHICH DOES
PROVIDE GOLD STANDARD
DEMOGRAPHIC AND ECONOMIC DATA
FOR EVERY MUNICIPALITY IN
SOUTHEASTERN MICHIGAN AND USING
COMPARISONS TO OTHER CITIES
EACH NEW HOUSING UNIT WOULD
REQUIRE BETWEEN EIGHTY ONE
THOUSAND AND ONE HUNDRED AND
THIRTEEN THOUSAND DOLLARS IN
INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT.
NOW IF WE MULTIPLY THAT BY THE
NUMBER OF UNITS THE PLAN CALLS
FOR, THE CITY COULD BE FACING A
FUNDING GAP OF BETWEEN TWO
POINT FOUR AND FIVE POINT ONE
DOLLARS BILLION OVER THE NEXT
TWENTY FIVE YEARS.
THAT WORKS OUT TO ROUGHLY
EIGHTY ONE TO ONE HUNDRED AND
SEVENTY MILLION DOLLARS EVERY
YEAR BETWEEN NOW AND 2050.
BUT THE PLAN DOESN'T EXPLAIN
WHERE THAT MONEY WILL COME
FROM.
IT INCLUDES NO FINANCIAL PLAN,
NO NEEDS ASSESSMENT AND NO
DISCUSSION OF HOW TO PAY FOR
THIS WITHOUT RAISING TAXES ON
RESIDENTS WHICH WILL BE
ESPECIALLY BURDENSOME ON THOSE
ALREADY STRUGGLING WITH
AFFORDABILITY WHICH WE KNOW IS
A MAJOR CHALLENGE.
AND THIS FALLS SQUARELY ON BOTH
HOMEOWNERS AND TENANTS.
THIS KIND OF SPENDING DEMANDS
TRANSPARENCY AND PUBLIC INPUT
UNTIL THE CITY DOES A FULL AND
HONEST ANALYSIS OF THE
INFRASTRUCTURE COSTS AND SHARES
IT WITH THE PEOPLE OF ANN
ARBOR.
THE PLAN SHOULD BE PAUSED.
WE NEED REAL ANSWERS BEFORE
MOVING FORWARD.
WE CAN DO IT.
WE KNOW THAT WE HAVE THE
ABILITY AND THE INTEREST, THE
FULL COMMITMENT OF THE
COMMUNITY TO MAKE OUR CITY
BETTER.
LET'S PAUSE A PLAN UNTIL THESE
IMPORTANT QUESTIONS CAN BE
CONSIDERED AND ANSWERED.
THAT'S THE RESPONSIBLE THING TO
DO.
THANK YOU
.
HELLO MY NAME IS ANN ARBOR.
I LIVE AT NINETEEN FIFTEEN
AUSTIN AVENUE AND WARD THREE.
I AM ADDING COMMENTS TO THE
MEMO THAT YOU WERE GIVEN THE
PLAN CALLS FOR MORE HOUSING FOR
LACKS SOLID DATA FOR ANALYSIS
TO SUPPORT HOW IT WILL ADDRESS
AFFORDABILITY.
THE PLAN DOES NOT DEFINE WHAT
AFFORDABLE MEANS OR EXPLAINS
HOW IT WILL HELP MODERATE
INCOME PEOPLE ESPECIALLY YOUNG
RENTERS AND FIRST TIME BUYERS.
INSTEAD IT PUSHES FOR BROAD
HOUSING EXPANSION WITH NO
EVIDENCE THAT MORE MARKET RATE
UNITS WILL LOWER PRICES.
THIS APPROACH RISKS INVITING
SPECULATIVE DEVELOPMENT THAT
COULD DISPLACE EXISTING
RESIDENTS IN VULNERABLE
NEIGHBORHOODS.
THE PLAN LEADS LEANS TOO
HEAVILY ON A BASIC SUPPLY AND
DEMAND THEORY, IGNORING FACTORS
LIKE DEVELOPER CONTROL OVER
PRICING, INCOME INEQUALITY AND
SPECULATIVE INVESTMENT RESEARCH
SHOWS THAT SIMPLY ADDING MORE
MARKET RATE HOUSING ASPECTS
ESPECIALLY WITHOUT POPULAR OR
JOB GROWTH WON'T IMPROVE
AFFORDABILITY IN PLACES LIKE
ANN ARBOR.
EVEN SOME PLANNING
COMMISSIONERS AND STAFF ADMIT
MARKET RATE DEVELOPMENT ALONE
WILL NOT REDUCE PRICES.
FINALLY, THE PLANS FOCUS ON
DENSIFICATION AND MULTIPLEX
RENTALS DOESN'T REFLECT THE
REAL HOUSING NEEDS OR DEMAND IN
OUR COMMUNITY.
LET'S PAUSE THE PLAN AND BRING
THE COMMUNITY TOGETHER TO
CREATE REALISTIC WAYS TO BRING
MORE AFFORDABLE HOUSING TO ANN
ARBOR.
THANK YOU.
GOOD EVENING RAMSBURG.
I LIVE AT FIFTY THREE CAMBRIDGE
IN WARD THREE SO I'D LIKE TO
SPEAK TO THE VALUES THAT ARE
STATED IN THE IN THE DRAFT PLAN
AND HOW THE PLAN IS NOT
CONSISTENT WITH THOSE VALUES
FOR AFFORDABILITY VALUES THAT
WE ALL EMBRACE.
BUT THE PLAN SADLY MISSES FOR
AFFORDABILITY BY INCREASING THE
VALUE OF THE LAND AND SPURRING
MARKET RATE HOUSING THE PLAN
WILL UNDERMINE ITS OWN GOALS.
>> THE EIGHT EIGHTY ONE
THOUSAND TWO HUNDRED AND
THIRTEEN THOUSAND PER UNIT IN
INFRASTRUCTURE COST WILL MAKE
HOUSING MORE UNAFFORDABLE
EITHER THROUGH IMPACT FEES OR
INCREASED PROPERTY VALUES
AFFORDABILITY GOALS CANNOT
COEXIST WITH MASSIVE
INFRASTRUCTURE SPENDING
REQUIREMENTS FOR EQUITY
INFRASTRUCTURE COST WILL
DISPROPORTIONATELY BURDEN FIXED
INCOME RESIDENTS PARTICULARLY
SENIORS AND LOW AND MODERATE
INCOME HOUSEHOLDS.
TAX AND UTILITY RATE INCREASES
WILL FORCE DISPLACEMENT
OF ECONOMICALLY VULNERABLE
POPULATIONS AND AND FOR THE
LOOSENING OF LAND USE
REQUIREMENTS AND REMOVAL
OF REVIEW AND APPROVAL
PROCEDURES WILL LEAVE THE
CITIES LOWER AND MODERATE
INCOME AREAS EXPOSED TO
DISPLACEMENT BY SPECULATIVE
INVESTMENT FOR SUSTAINABILITY.
WATER SEWER STORMWATER SYSTEMS
HAVE PHYSICAL CAPACITY LIMITS
THAT CANNOT ACCOMMODATE THE
ENVISIONED GROWTH.
IF IT WERE TO OCCUR, MASSIVE
CONSTRUCTION WILL GENERATE
SUBSTANTIAL EMBODIED
CARBON CONTRADICTING THE TWO
ZERO GOALS.
CAPITAL COST WILL DIVERT FUNDS
FROM OPERATIONAL SUSTAINABILITY
INITIATIVES AND NEGLECT AND IN
THE PLAN THERE IT NEGLECTS TO
INCLUDE PROTECTION OF NATURAL
FEATURES SUCH THAT ARE CENTRAL
TO RESILIENCE HEALTH AND
WELFARE FOR DYNAMISM, ECONOMIC
TRENDS SUCH AS DECLINING
EMPLOYMENT AND THE UNIVERSITY
TRAITS CONTRADICT GROWTH
ASSUMPTIONS.
THE PLAN DOES NOT IDENTIFY
INDUSTRIES TO OCCUPY COMMERCIAL
SPACES OR EMPLOY NEW RESIDENTS.
ACTUAL DEVELOPMENT WILL BE
CONSTRAINED BY MARKET REALITY
RESULTING IN PARTIAL
INFORMATION IMPLEMENTATION AT
BEST.
SO ONCE AGAIN I URGE YOU TO
PAUSE A PLAN AND LET'S START
WITH A BETTER PROCESS AND A
BETTER UNDERSTANDING.
YOU'RE BEGINNING TO GET THAT
KIND OF FEEDBACK NOW FROM
RESIDENTS.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
GOOD EVENING.
GOOD EVENING DORKUS LIVE AT
TWELVE FORTY THREE MARLBORO ON
THE SOUTH SIDE I'M HERE TO TALK
ABOUT THE COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT
.
>> I WAS VERY SURPRISED TO
LEARN ABOUT US ABOUT A MONTH
AGO AND MY SURPRISE IS REALLY
BASED UPON THE FACT THAT I'M
THE REPRESENTATIVE OF OUR
COMMUNITY ARE OUR HOUSING GROUP
AND I INQUIRED WHY I WASN'T
INFORMED AND BRETT DID SUPPLIED
ME WITH A LIST OF EMAILS THAT
WERE SENT TO ME AND AS I PERUSE
THOSE EMAILS I DISCOVERED VERY
QUICKLY THAT YOU HAD EMAIL
WRONG AND THAT SURPRISES ME
BECAUSE MY EMAIL IS ON YOUR
WEBSITE BECAUSE I AM THE
REPRESENTATIVE OF OUR
HOMEOWNERS ASSOCIATION.
THERE WERE SOME THAT WERE
CORRECT IN THAT PIQUED MY
INTEREST.
SO I WENT BACK AND LOOKED TO
SEE WHAT THEY WERE ABOUT AND LO
AND BEHOLD I ACTUALLY READ THEM
AND FILLED OUT THE SURVEY THE
COMMUNITY SURVEY WAS THE FIRST
ONE THAT WAS THAT THAT I CAME
ACROSS AND I HOW I MEAN THAT
DIDN'T EVEN JIVE WITH THIS
PLAN.
IT DIDN'T EVEN MAKE SENSE.
I NEVER MADE THE CONNECTION
THAT THAT SURVEY HAD ANYTHING
TO DO WITH THIS BECAUSE AS I
READ AND FILLED OUT THAT SURVEY
,IT NEVER ONCE MENTIONED EVEN
THE WORD ZONING OR ELIMINATING
ZONING OR ADDING DUPLEXES OR
TRIPLEX OR QUADRUPLE LEXUS OR
APARTMENT BUILDINGS INSIDE
RESIDENTIAL AREAS.
THERE WAS NO MENTION OF DENSITY
.
IT WAS MOSTLY QUESTIONS THAT
YOU WOULD EXPECT ON
DEMOGRAPHICS SURVEY LIKE YOU
KNOW, DO YOU OWN YOUR HOUSE?
DO YOU HAVE KIDS?
WHERE DO YOU SHOP THAT KIND
OF THING.
SO IT JUST SIMPLY DIDN'T MAKE I
NEVER MADE THE CONNECTION THE
WORD THESE IMPORTANT WORDS THAT
WOULD INCLUDE ME IN WERE SIMPLY
NOT THERE.
OK, SO AND AS I READ ON AND
LOOK FURTHER INTO MY EMAILS I
CAME ACROSS THE MEETING IN THE
BOX AND I WAS ACTUALLY ONE
OF THE TWO HUNDRED PEOPLE THAT
READ THAT AND FILLED IT OUT AND
AGAIN IN THAT THAT MEETING IN
THE BOX THERE'S NO MENTION
OF OF APARTMENTS AND
NEIGHBORHOODS, NO REZONING
MENTIONED AT ALL THAT WOULD
HAVE TRUST ME HAD PERKED MY
INTEREST.
WELL, THERE WAS SOME MENTION
OF DUPLEXES AND TRIPLE XS AND
COMPLEXES AND I REMEMBER BEING
AT THE VERY BOTTOM OF ONE
OF THE PAGES AND A LITTLE AND
THERE WERE SOME DIAGRAMS BUT
BUT THERE WAS NO BUT THERE WAS
A REFERENCE THAT THESE WERE
GOING TO SERVE TO REPLACE
EXISTING SINGLE FAMILY HOMES.
I THINK WHAT WE NEED TO DO IS
PAUSE THE PLAN AND AND DO WRITE
SEND OUT EMAIL OR SEND OUT
POSTCARDS.
>> THANK YOU.
GOOD EVENING.
MY NAME IS NANCY THE LIEBREICH
.
I LIVE AT TWELVE TWENTY TWO
WOODLAWN AVENUE IN ANN ARBOR.
I'D LIKE TO RESPOND TO THE
CLAIM THAT COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT
ON THE PLAN HAS BEEN
SUBSTANTIAL IN REALITY MOST
RESIDENTS DON'T EVEN KNOW IT
EXISTS.
I ONLY LEARNED ABOUT IT
RECENTLY MYSELF QUITE
INADVERTENTLY IN TALKING TO A
NEIGHBOR CASUALLY THE CITY HAS
DONE VERY LITTLE TO INFORM THE
PUBLIC.
THE MICHIGAN PLANNING ENABLING
ACT MANDATES PUBLIC NOTICE
HEARINGS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR
COMMUNITY INPUT INTO THE MASTER
PLANNING PROCESS.
THE STUDY FAILED TO TAKE THE
MINIMAL MEASURE OF MAILING
NOTICES TO ALL RESIDENTS TO
INFORM THEM AND SEEK THEIR
ENGAGEMENT IN THE PLANNING
PROCESS.
THERE WERE NO SERIOUS EFFORTS
TO ENGAGE RESIDENTS DIRECTLY.
MOST PEOPLE ARE UNAWARE OF THE
PROCESS AND WHAT IT COULD MEAN
FOR AN ARBOR'S FUTURE.
WE KNOW THIS FROM TALKING TO
OUR NEIGHBORS ONCE WE FOUND OUT
ABOUT THIS PROCESS IN TWENTY
TWENTY FOUR CONSULTANTS RAN AN
UNSIGNED TRAFFIC SURVEY THAT
WAS NOT SCIENTIFICALLY VALID.
IT HAD NO RANDOM SAMPLING AND
ALLOWED REPEAT RESPONSES THAT
INCLUDED NON RESIDENTS AND WAS
VULNERABLE TO BOT'S ONLY ABOUT
TWO PERCENT OF ANN ARBOR
RESIDENTS RESPOND IN PUBLIC
MEETINGS AND OPEN HOUSES WERE
POORLY ATTENDED AND USED
INFORMAL TOOLS LIKE DOT MAPS
WHICH DON'T PROVIDE MEANINGFUL
OR MEASURABLE FEEDBACK OVERALL
GENUINE AND MEANINGFUL
INCLUSIVE CITY OF THE PUBLIC
WAS NOT A PRIORITY.
>> THERE WAS NO EFFORT TO MEET
PEOPLE WHERE THEY LIVED NO
OUTREACH IN NEIGHBORHOODS TO
UNDERSTAND RESIDENTS PRIORITIES
,CONCERNS AND VISIONS FOR THE
FUTURE OF OUR TOWN.
NO OUTREACH TO LEARN WHAT
RESIDENTS CONSIDER TO BE
CHALLENGES AND PRIORITIES FOR
RESIDENTS AND PLANNING FOR THE
YEARS AHEAD.
WE NEED TO PAUSE THE PLAN IN
ORDER TO INCLUDE MORE ROBUST
AND INCLUSIVE ENGAGEMENT WITH
RESIDENTS AND TO LEARN FROM THE
RESIDENTS ABOUT THE ISSUES
FACING THE VARIETY OF AREAS
ACROSS ANN ARBOR.
THANK YOU.
HELLO MY NAME IS SAM HOMAN.
I LIVE AT FOURTEEN FIFTY ONE
COLOR.
I WANT TO TAKE A MINUTE TO TALK
ABOUT THE BUSINESS FLEX FLEX
DISTRICT AS IT'S PRESENTED IN
THE PLAN CURRENTLY BASICALLY
WHAT YOU'RE DOING IS YOU'RE
CREATING THIS INDUSTRIAL ZONE
THAT ALSO ALLOWS RESIDENTIAL
WHICH IS A VERY BIZARRE ZONING
CATEGORY AND I WOULD REALLY
ADVISE AGAINST CREATING A
RESIDENTIAL INDUSTRIAL ZONE.
WHAT THAT WILL DO FUNCTIONALLY
IS PUSH ALL INDUSTRIAL USES
OUTSIDE OF THE CITY AT THESE
OUTSIDE OF THE FREEWAY AND IT
WOULD ALSO ALLOW RESIDENTIAL
USES RESEARCH PARK WHICH IS NOT
AN APPROPRIATE PART OF THE CITY
FOR RESIDENTIAL AND REALLY WE
WANT DIVERSE USES OF LAND
WITHIN THE CITY.
IF YOU LOOK ON SOUTH INDUSTRIAL
KIND OF QUIRKY STORES LIKE
GROSS ELECTRIC MANZ JACK'S
HARDWARE WAS DISPLACED OFF
PACARD DOWN THERE AND IT ALLOWS
SIMPLEXITY INTERESTS IN THE
CITY.
SO I WOULD ADVISE YOU TO PLEASE
KEEP A DEDICATED ZONE WITHIN
THE CITY AND I'VE HEARD IT SAID
THAT YOU KNOW, WHATEVER THE IF
HOUSING IS THE MOST VALUABLE
PIECE THAT'S WHAT WE SHOULD
USE.
THAT IS NOT A ARGUMENT FOR
ALLOWING HOUSING EVERYWHERE.
THAT IS AN ARGUMENT FOR
LIMITING LAND USE ZONING
EVERYWHERE.
SO IF ALUMINUM SMELTER IS THE
BEST USE OF LAND IT SHOULD BE
ALLOWED THE SMELTER WANTS TO
BUILD IT WHICH IS NOT WHAT'S
BEING PROPOSED.
SO PLEASE DO KEEP SOME DIVERSE
USES
FOR INDUSTRIAL USE WITHIN
THE CITY.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
HELLO MY NAME IS WILL IF I LIVE
IN FIVE TWENTY EIGHT NORTH
STATE AND I COMPLETELY AGREE
I'M HERE TO TALK ABOUT THE
FLECK'S DISTRICT AS WELL AND I
THINK IT IS A VERY AWKWARD
DISTRICT SHOULD BE STRUCK AND
SHOULD BE REPLACED BY THE
TRANSITION DISTRICT SO I AGREE
THAT IT'S A PROBLEM.
I THINK THE SOLUTION IS A
LITTLE BIT DIFFERENT.
I THINK THE FLUX DISTRICT
REALLY HAS TWO CHARACTERISTICS
THAT DIFFER FROM THE TRANSITION
DISTRICT.
IT SEEMS TO ALLOW MORE
NUISANCES THAN IS CURRENTLY
ALLOWED THE CITY'S PERFORMANCE
STANDARDS AND THEN ALSO
RESTRICTS HOUSING IN SOME
UNSPECIFIED WAYS.
>> I DON'T THINK THESE TWO
FEATURES ARE GOOD.
THE FIRST FEATURE ABOUT
NUISANCES IS IMPORTANT BECAUSE
THEY'RE SENSITIVE LAND USE IS
ALREADY ALLOWED IN THESE AREAS
ON S INDUSTRIAL YOU HAVE
CENTRAL ACADEMY WHICH IS AN
ARABIC LANGUAGE CHARTER SCHOOL
AND YOU COULD SEE KIDS PLAYING
ON THE FIELD THERE IF YOU DRIVE
PAST THERE ON A WEEKDAY YOU
HAVE THE CITY'S OWN AFFORDABLE
HOUSING AS WELL AND RESEARCH
PARK YOU HAVE PROGRESS PARK
WHICH IS A PUBLIC SCHOOL IN THE
CENTER OF THE PARK.
YOU ALSO HAVE A HOTEL NEARBY
HAS ITS OWN MIXED USE IN ONE
CORNER OF RESEARCH PARK AND ON
PACKARD AND WASHTENAW ACROSS
FROM COUNTY FARM PARK YOU HAVE
A CHURCH, YOU HAVE SOME
PERSONAL SCHOOL.
YOU ANN ARBOR, KINDERCARE.
>> SO THERE'S ALREADY SENSITIVE
LAND USES IN THESE PLACES.
SO I DON'T THINK LOOSENING THE
NUISANCE STANDARDS IS
RESPONSIBLE THERE.
INSTEAD I RECOMMEND ZONING
TRANSITION BECAUSE THEN YOU CAN
STILL HAVE INDUSTRIAL USES.
I THINK YOU SHOULD BE VERY
FLEXIBLE WITH THOSE USES SO
LONG AS THEY MEET BASIC
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
SECONDLY, THERE'S A NOTION THAT
HOUSING WILL CROWD OUT ALL
BUSINESSES BUT IF YOU LOOK AT
THE CORRIDORS WASH NOT PLYMOUTH
STADIUM, THE NORTH PART
OF SOUTH INDUSTRIAL THEY'VE
ALLOWED BOTH HOUSING AND
BUSINESSES FOR DECADES AND
HOUSING HAS NOT DRIVEN OUT ALL
THOSE BUSINESSES YOU CAN GET
YOUR CAR FIXED DOWNTOWN AT
JAPANESE AUTO.
I RECOMMEND IT AND THERE'S A
FIRESTONE RIGHT OUT HERE ON A
DIVISION.
SO EVEN WHERE THERE'S BEEN
MAXIMUM RESIDENTIAL PRESSURE,
NOT ALL OF THESE BUSINESSES
HAVE BEEN DRIVEN OUT.
IN FACT, THERE'S BEEN VERY
LITTLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT AND
THE OTHER COMMERCIAL CORRIDORS
.
>> SO I THINK YOU HAVE A CLEAR
CHOICE BETWEEN MIXED USE
DEVELOPMENT WITH PERFORMANCE
STANDARDS OR THIS KIND
OF AWKWARD MAYBE RESIDENTIAL
BUT ALSO WE'RE GOING TO WEAKEN
THE NUISANCE STANDARDS WITH
FLEX WHICH DOESN'T REALLY MAKE
SENSE.
I THINK THE LATTER COULD CREATE
PROBLEMS AND WOULD ALSO
ENCOURAGE THE UNIVERSITY TO
CONTINUE TO BUY UP MORE LAND
AND TAKE IT OFF THE TAX ROLLS.
SO I THINK FOR ECONOMIC
DIVERSITY, FOR HOUSING AND FOR
I THINK SAFETY I RECOMMEND
TRANSITION.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
HI, I'M MARY JANE WORDEN.
I LIVE AT TWO ONE TWO SEVEN
WALLINGFORD ROAD.
I LIVE IN THE WARD THREE AND I
JUST WANTED TO TALK ABOUT THE
IMPORTANCE OF NEIGHBORHOODS
WHEN I MOVED BACK TO AN AREA I
CHOSE TO LIVE DOWNTOWN.
>> I WANTED TO BE IN A BUSY,
VIBRANT, CROWDED AREA.
BUT WITH TIME YOU'RE MY LIFE
CHANGED AND I WANTED TO HAVE A
MORE MORE SPACE AND I WANTED A
QUIETER NEIGHBORHOOD IN WHICH
TO RAISE MY FAMILY.
SO I MOVED SO I BOUGHT A HOUSE
DOWNTOWN AND THEN I OR A CONDO
AND THEN I BOUGHT A HOME IN THE
NEIGHBORHOOD I LIVE IN NOW I
THINK A LOT OF PEOPLE BUY HOMES
THAT FIT THEIR NEEDS AND WHEN I
BOUGHT I BOUGHT IN A
NEIGHBORHOOD THAT I SAW AND
LIKED AND NOW YOUR OR THE PLAN
SAYS WE CAN CHANGE YOUR
NEIGHBORHOOD WITHOUT ME HAVING
A TRUE CHOICE IN IT PER SAY AND
WITH IT I THINK IT'S REALLY
IMPORTANT THAT THE PEOPLE ARE
VERY INVOLVED AND THAT WE DO
PAUSE THE PLAN SO THAT WE KNOW
WHAT WE DID BY AND INVESTED A
LOT OF MONEY IN AND INVESTED IN
OUR CITY FOR WHAT WE LOVED AND
NOW WHAT'S JUST GOING TO CHANGE
.
SO THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
WELL, KATHY GRISWOLD THREE FIVE
SIX FIVE BLOCKS DRIVE LAST
NIGHT I SPOKE AT COUNCIL ABOUT
PEDESTRIAN SAFETY AMONG OTHER
THINGS AND THEN AT ALMOST
MIDNIGHT LAST NIGHT AN ELDERLY
GENTLEMAN IN A WHEELCHAIR WHO
WAS CROSSING HURON WAS HIT AND
KILLED.
NOW THERE'S A LOT TO TALK ABOUT
WHAT WE CAN DO BUT WHAT'S
REALLY IMPORTANT JUST LIKE WITH
THIS PLAN IS THAT WE HAVE AN
EXCELLENT PROCESS AND DATA
DRIVEN DECISIONS.
ANN ARBOR HAS SPENT TENS
OF MILLIONS OF DOLLARS ON
PEDESTRIAN AND CYCLING
INFRASTRUCTURE IN THE LAST TEN
YEARS.
YET WE HAVE NOT HAD A DECREASE
IN OUR CRASH RATE IN PROPORTION
TO THIS SPENDING.
IN FACT TWENTY TWENTY FIVE IS
HEADED TOWARDS THE HIGHEST
CRASH RATE SINCE I DON'T KNOW
TWENTY FOURTEEN OR SO WITH TEN
SERIOUS CRASHES OR FATALITIES
ALREADY THIS YEAR.
SO I WOULD SAY WE'VE GOT A FOUR
ALARM FIRE AND WE NEED TO LOOK
AT WHAT'S HAPPENING THERE AND
MAKE SURE WE HAVE A GOOD
PROCESS AND MAKE SURE THAT IS
INCORPORATED INTO ANYTHING THAT
WE DO IN TERMS OF INCREASING
DENSITY IN THIS COMMUNITY.
ALSO LAST WEEK A RESIDENT
MENTIONED MILLER AVENUE AND HE
QUESTIONED THE CLASSIFICATION
OF MILLER AVENUE.
MAYBE IT WAS DENSER THAN WHAT
HE EXPECTED AND DENSER THAN
OTHER SIMILAR STREETS AND THAT
CAUGHT MY ATTENTION BECAUSE I
HAVE RAISED THE ISSUE OF THE
TWO WAY CYCLE TRAFFIC ON MILLER
AND FOR SOME REASON THERE'S
BEEN REAL RESISTANCE TO SIMPLY
HAVING AN ENGINEERING STUDY AND
DETERMINING IF SAFE OR NOT.
SO I HAVE TO QUESTION WHETHER
THERE IS ANY CONNECTION IN THE
FACT THAT MILLER AVENUE MAY BE
UP ZONED FOR GREATER DENSITY
AND THIS TWO WAY CYCLE TRACK IS
CONNECTED IN SOME WAY IN MY
REMAINING TIME I'M JUST GOING
TO MENTION A COUPLE OF PROBLEMS
THAT NEED TO BE ADDRESSED.
WE HAD A DEVELOPMENT ON SUNSET
MILLION DOLLAR CONDOS, NO
SIDEWALKS.
WHY IN THE WORLD ARE WE
BUILDING WITHOUT SIDEWALKS?
THAT HAS BEEN THE PRACTICE FOR
FORTY FIFTY YEARS.
IF YOU BUILD RESIDENTIAL PUT IN
SIDEWALKS, GLENN, WE'VE GOT THE
BIG HOTEL THERE.
THERE ARE NUMEROUS PROBLEMS
I'VE DOCUMENTED THOSE WITH WITH
A TO FIX IT AND LASTLY THIRTY
FIVE HUNDRED WASHTENAW WHICH IS
A STRIP MALL HAS SIGNIFICANT
PROBLEMS AND THAT NEEDS TO BE
ADDRESSED.
SO WHEN WE HAVE ALL THESE
PROBLEMS WITH OUR EXISTING
AREAS WE REALLY NEED TO GET
THEM FIXED AND HAVE A GOOD
PROCESS BEFORE WE START JUST
SIMPLY DUPLICATING THIS.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
HELLO.
PLANNING MISSION.
I WAS ALSO HERE LAST NIGHT
TALKING ABOUT SAFETY FOR
STADIUM AND ONE OF THE COMMENTS
THAT I MADE IS THAT I'M GLAD
THAT I'M YOUNG AND ABLE TO RUN
ACROSS FIVE LANE ROADS QUICKLY.
I DIDN'T THINK THAT JUST A FEW
HOURS LATER AN OLDER GENTLEMAN
IN A WHEELCHAIR WOULD BE
CROSSING HERE ON AND KILLED.
YEAH, I'VE BEEN OUT OF IT TODAY
THINKING ABOUT THAT AND AND IT
STRIKES ME IS THAT THOUGH THE
CITY DOESN'T HAVE THE ABILITY
TO CONTROL HERE ON RIGHT NOW IT
DOES AND HAS THIS ENORMOUS ROAD
RUNNING THROUGH THE CENTER
OF OUR CITY BECAUSE THEY KNOW
THAT EIGHTY THOUSAND COMMUTERS
COME INTO THIS CITY AND HERE ON
TRAFFIC VOLUMES DON'T ACTUALLY
DICTATE THAT IT'S A FIVE LANE
ROAD.
IT CONTINUES TO PROVIDE
POLITICAL AMMUNITION TO KEEPING
THIS ENORMOUS ROAD IN THE
MIDDLE OF OUR CITY.
I THINK THAT WE NEED TO FIND
HOUSING SO THAT SOME OF THOSE
EIGHTY THOUSAND COMMUTERS WHO
WOULD LIKE TO LIVE IN THE CITY
AND WE KNOW THEY WOULD LIKE TO
LIVE IN THE CITY CAN DO SO.
I'VE TALKED TO YOU BEFORE ABOUT
THE LOW RISE DISTRICT COUNCIL
HAS ALREADY FORCED THE
COMMISSIONER'S HAND AND CAT
LURAY DISTRICT AT THIRTY FIVE
FEET OR THREE STORIES.
SO WE NEED TO MAKE SURE NOW
THAT THE OTHER AREAS ALONG THE
ARTERIALS CAN SUPPORT MORE
HOUSING.
SO I'M ASKING YOU TO ELIMINATE
THE FLEXCEL AND THAT HAS THIS
UNCLEAR REQUIREMENT TO THAT
WOULD POTENTIALLY PROHIBIT SOME
HOUSING DEVELOPMENT AND TO ALSO
UNCAP THE TRANSITION ZONE FAR
FROM LOW RISE RESIDENTIAL.
IN FACT I REALLY THINK THAT
THERE SHOULD JUST BE TWO ZONES
THE LOW RISE THAT WE'VE TALKED
ABOUT AND A CITY DISTRICT WE
LIVE IN A CITY MANY OTHER
CITIES HAVE FIGURED OUT HOW TO
PUT HOUSING ON TOP OF GROCERY
STORES, HOUSING ON TOP OF ALL
KINDS OF OTHER INDUSTRIAL USES.
SO THE MARKET CAN SUPPORT THESE
CONCEPTS.
WE SHOULDN'T REQUIRE THAT
BUSINESS OR THAT DEVELOPERS PUT
ACTIVE FIRST FOR COMMERCIAL
USES IN THESE HOUSING
COMPLEXES.
AGAIN, THE MARKET WILL DICTATE
WHAT GETS BUILT.
I WANT TO THANK YOU ALL FOR
YOUR TIME AND YOUR WORK.
YOU'RE VERY EXPERIENCED
PROFESSIONALS.
I WISH I HAD TIME TO GO THROUGH
EVERY POINT THAT WAS BROUGHT UP
TONIGHT AND REFUTE THEM.
I THINK THERE'S A TON
OF RESEARCH IN THE PLANNING
LITERATURE THAT REFUTES A LOT
OF THIS STUFF.
SUPPLY AND DEMAND IS VERY MUCH
APPLICABLE TO THE HOUSING
MARKET.
YOU KNOW I BELIEVE IT ACTUALLY.
I'LL SAY ONE MORE THING WHICH
IS THAT IF JOB OPPORTUNITIES DO
DECREASE BECAUSE OF THE TRUMP
ADMINISTRATION, WE WON'T BE AT
A LOSS FOR NOT PRESERVING LAND
FOR JOB OPPORTUNITIES IF THERE
ARE FEWER JOB OPPORTUNITIES,
WE'LL ALLOW THE MARKET TO
ADJUST USE THE INFLEXIBLY FOR
HOUSING FOR DIFFERENT TYPES
OF INDUSTRIAL COMMERCIAL USE.
THANK YOU.
IDENTIFY YOURSELF WHEN YOU MAKE
YOUR COMMENTS PLEASE MASTER
ABOUT TWENTY SEVENTEEN FIRST
THREE.
THANK YOU.
BEFORE YOU START MR. OF FOLLOW
UP JUST THOSE THAT ARE IN THE
CHAMBER I UNDERSTAND THAT YOU
MAY WANT TO MAKE COMMENTS AS
PEOPLE ARE TALKING BUT IT
ACTUALLY
DISTRACTS FROM US
BEING ABLE TO HEAR THE PERSON
WHO'S SPEAKING.
SO IF YOU'D LIKE TO HAVE A
COMMENT WITH YOUR CHAIR PARTNER
I'D INVITE YOU TO LEAVE THE
CHAMBER JUST SO THAT WE CAN
GIVE OUR ATTENTION TO THE
SPEAKERS AS WE DID WHEN YOU
SPOKE.
>> GO AHEAD, MR. THANK YOU.
KIRK WESTFALL THREE FIVE ZERO
FIVE CHARTER PLACE OR TWO JUST
OFF THE TOP IN THAT TO
REITERATE THE VOLUMES THAT HAVE
ALREADY WRITTEN THAT IN BRIEF
THE POINTS I'D LIKE TO ADVOCATE
FOR IS DELETING ALL MENTIONS
OF AFLEX AND INNOVATION AND
NEIGHBORHOOD CHARACTER ALLOWING
HIGH RISE BUILDINGS IN
TRANSITION WHEN THEY'RE AWAY
FROM LOW RISE THIS IS THE BEST
WAY TO STOP FORCING STUDENTS
FROM LIVING IN PLACES THEY
DON'T WANT TO LIVE OR IT SEEMS
LIKE OTHER PEOPLE DON'T WANT
THEM TO LIVE AND ALSO ALLOWING
ALL NON ARE ONE OR TWO PARCEL'S
TO BE IN TRANSITION OR ELSE
THEY WILL LIKELY END UP BEING
DOWN ZONED.
I PROVIDED A MAP THAT U OF M
STUDENT CREATED A WHILE AGO.
I WOULD JUST ADVOCATE FOR
LOOKING TO THAT MAP AS AN
OBJECTIVE SORT OF DEFENSIBLE
STARTING POINT FOR TRANSITION
AND AS I MENTIONED IN MY LAST
REMARKS I COULD FIND AT LEAST
THREE COMMUNITIES IN MY
NEIGHBORHOOD THAT ARE CURRENTLY
SLATED FOR LOW RISE THAT HAVE
BUILDING FORMS THAT WOULD NEVER
ACCEPTABLE IN LOW RISE.
SO I'D ENCOURAGE YOU TO JUST TO
LOOK AT THAT MAP FOR YOUR
NEIGHBORHOOD.
THERE ARE ALSO SMALL AREAS THAT
WERE RECENTLY ZONED TAKE ONE
LIKE TRADER JOE'S AND BASKIN
ROBBINS THAT ARE FOR SOME
REASON NOW TRANSITION INSTEAD
HUB OR ANYWAY ARE ISSUES WITH
THE MAP AND ON THE POINT
OF TRANSITION AS WELL.
IN A SIMILAR VEIN I BELIEVE
SELECTING A FEW DOZEN ARE ONE
OR TWO PARCELS TO BE INCLUDED
IN TRANSITION.
PARTS OF MILLER STADIUM IN
WASHTENAW MAY END UP CAUSING
IMPLEMENTATION ISSUES AND
NEIGHBORHOOD DIVISIONS.
SO I WOULD JUST ADVISE LOOKING
AT THAT AGAIN I THINK TO
RESPOND TO SOME OF THE CONCERNS
ABOUT INFRASTRUCTURE THIS HAS
BEEN BROUGHT AS A BOOGEYMAN
FROM TIME TO TIME AND AND YOU
KNOW, I HAVE BEEN LOOKING AT
THE CITY'S WATER CONSUMPTION
LEVELS THE PAST TEN OR TWELVE
YEARS AND I THINK WE ARE AT
ABOUT FIFTEEN PERCENT OFF THE
PEAK CONSUMPTION AND I KNOW
THAT SEWER FLOWS ARE YOU KNOW,
USUALLY MIRROR WATER
CONSUMPTION FLOWS.
>> SO JUST AS A BASIS FOR
CONCERN, I DON'T THINK WE'RE IN
AN EMERGENCY IN TERMS
OF INFRASTRUCTURE AND PLUS THE
CITY WOULD NEVER BE ON THE HOOK
TO PROVIDE INFRASTRUCTURE THE
DEVELOPER CAUSES A NEED FOR SO
I WOULD RATHER AS AS SOME
COMMISSIONERS PUT IT LAST TIME
LET THE INFRASTRUCTURE FOLLOW
THE THE DEVELOPMENT AND FOR
PEOPLE WHO ARE CONCERNED THAT
HOUSING SUPPLY DOES NOT LEAD TO
AFFORDABILITY, I WOULD
RECOMMEND SEARCHING UP SUPPLY
SKEPTICISM REVISITED A STUDY
PUT OUT.
BUT THE ACCUMULATION OF STUDIES
PUT OUT BY THE FURMAN CENTER
AND IN NEW YORK AND ALSO A
STUDY BY JOHN CALLED NEW NEW
BUILDING CREATES AFFORDABILITY
EVEN FOR THOSE WHO CAN'T AFFORD
THE NEW BUILDINGS.
THANK YOU.
THANK YOU
.
HELLO.
HELLO JAMIE HAJJIS.
I'M AT ONE TWO TWO FIVE
KENSINGTON DRIVE AND I HAVE
QUITE A FEW CONCERNS BUT MOST
OF ALL I BELIEVE THAT WE SHOULD
STEP BACK, SEE HOW THE TRANSIT
CORRIDORS WORK.
I'M SEEING THAT WE ARE ALREADY
GIVING INTO WHAT DEVELOPERS WHO
ARE INSISTING WE BUILD PARKING
STRUCTURES FOR IT AND WE ARE
DOING IT.
HOW ABOUT WHEN THEY WANT TO PUT
EXTRA GAS LINES IN OR
GEOTHERMAL AND WE WANT TO BUILD
SO MUCH THAT WE GIVE IN TO
THINGS LIKE THAT AND I THINK
THAT'S WHERE WE REALLY HAVE TO
BE CAREFUL IN A LOT OF THESE
NEW PROJECTS OUR NEW BUILDS AND
WHAT RESTRICTIONS ARE GOING TO
BE ON THOSE NEW BUILDS TO TAKE
US OUT TO EIGHT TO ZERO OUR
GOALS?
I THINK OUR INFRASTRUCTURE
PARKING WE CAN ROAD CLEANING
THE ROADS.
CAN YOU IMAGINE IF AN APARTMENT
IS IN MY NEIGHBORHOOD AND THEY
GO TO TRY AND THE ROADS TWICE A
YEAR?
IT WILL NEVER IT WILL NEVER
HAPPEN.
I MEAN CERTAIN THINGS ARE NOT
GOING TO WORK.
WE WILL WORK THROUGH THEM BUT
WE ALSO NEED TO THINK ABOUT
THEM ALSO MY PARTICULAR
PROPERTY IS RIGHT BECAUSE IT
BACKS UP TO IT'S NOT A ZONE
IT'S MEN LIKE MANUFACTURING
NON-INDUSTRIAL I BUT RIGHT
AGAINST PUTZEL HAITI I CAN GET
A COMMITMENT THAT MY PROPERTY
MIGHT NOT BE CHANGED TO LIGHT
MANUFACTURING.
WHAT AM I GOING TO DO.
WHAT WHAT DO I DO JUST SIT HERE
AND GO MAYBE I'LL BE LUCKY AND
HOW WOULD I SELL MY PROPERTY.
OUR NEIGHBORHOOD HAS BEEN
THROUGH A LOT AND THIS IS JUST
ONE MORE THING THAT WE'RE
HAVING TO DEAL WITH AND I'M
VERY NERVOUS.
I THINK WE SHOULD SEND OUT
INFORMATION MORE INFORMATION IS
BETTER HAVE A COMMUNITY PLAN OR
GET TOGETHER AND WE COME UP
WITH SOME OTHER IDEAS.
THAT'S ALL I'M ASKING.
LET'S JUST HOLD OFF PLEASE.
I DON'T WANT TO BE PART OF THE
MANUFACTURING ZONE IN MY HOUSE
.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU
.
HI.
GOOD EVENING EVERYONE.
MY NAME IS JOE ZILKHA.
I'M LIVING AT NINETEEN TWENTY
WOODBERRY DRIVE AT WOODBERRY
GARDENS IN THE FOURTH WARD
LOCATED ALONG MAJOR TRANSIT
CORRIDOR THE SIX EIGHT SIX B
ELSWORTH STATE BUS LINE AND
THAT'S WHAT I'LL BE TALKING
ABOUT TONIGHT.
SOME MAY CALL THE COMPLEX AT
WOODBERRY GARDENS A MIXED USE
TRANSITION TRANSITION ZONE.
THAT'S HOW IT APPEARS AS SUCH
ON THE LATEST COMPREHENSIVE
PLAN.
I'M HERE TO SPECIFICALLY
ADVOCATE FOR ALLOWING MORE
OF THAT ALONG OUR MAJOR TRANSIT
CORRIDORS AND SPECIFICALLY EVEN
UP TO THREE TO SIX STOREYS AS
HAS BEEN DONE IN MINNEAPOLIS.
SO EVERY DAY I TAKE THE BUS TO
I CAN'T OVERSTATE HOW MUCH THAT
HAS IMPROVED MY DAY TO DAY
QUALITY OF LIFE.
I STILL DO OWN A CAR BUT I
RARELY USE IT ANYMORE.
I'VE SAVED THOUSANDS OF DOLLARS
MONEY THAT DOESN'T GO TOWARDS
GAS, INSURANCE TIRES, OIL
CHANGES AND SENDING THAT MONEY
NOW SPENDING EXCUSE ME BACK
INTO THE LOCAL ECONOMY THAT
SMALL BUSINESSES AT LOCAL
RESTAURANTS, AT LOCAL EVENTS
AND NOT SPENDING ON PARKING
EITHER OR SITTING IN TRAFFIC
WORRYING ABOUT MY NEXT OIL
CHANGE OR MY NEXT FILL UP.
BEYOND THAT I'VE EXPERIENCED
REAL MENTAL HEALTH BENEFITS AS
LESS STRESS, MORE TIME TO THINK
MAYBE READ OUT WHATEVER THIS
LIFESTYLE REALLY WORKS.
AND ANN ARBOR IS ONE OF THE FEW
CITIES IN MICHIGAN WHERE I'M
ABLE TO LIVE THIS WAY.
I'M NOT ALONE EVERY DAY AT MY
STOP AT WOODBURY THERE ARE
DOZENS OF MY NEIGHBORS THAT
JOIN ME ON THE BUS TO GET TO
WORK SCHOOL EVENTS AND MORE.
AS EVERYONE HERE IS PROBABLY
AWARE, WE PASSED A LARGE BUS
MILEAGE IN TWENTY TWENTY TWO
AND WE'RE NOW SEEING THE
POSITIVE RESULTS MOVE IN MORE
ROUTES LIKE MINE ON INDUSTRIAL
WASHTENAW PLIMOTH ST. JACKSON
AND MORE ARE ALREADY OFFERING
FREQUENT AND RELIABLE BUS
SERVICE AND DEVELOPMENTS SUCH
AS PACARD ROAD NEXT TO FRAZIERS
PUB ALREADY SHOWING US WHAT
THIS TYPE OF DEVELOPMENT LOOK
LIKE HOUSING THAT'S WALKABLE,
TRANSIT ORIENTED FITS INTO THE
NEIGHBORHOOD FABRIC BUT STILL
ALLOWS FOR A CAR IF YOU WANT IT
TO EXPAND THIS TYPE OF HOUSING
ALONG OUR HIGH FREQUENCY
TRANSIT CORRIDORS, WE MAKE ANN
ARBOR MORE ACCESSIBLE NOT JUST
FOR THOSE WHO CAN AFFORD TO
LIVE DOWNTOWN BUT FOR TEACHERS,
POLICE OFFICERS, FIREFIGHTERS,
HOSPITAL WORKERS, GRAD
STUDENTS, RESTAURANT STAFF,
RETAIL EMPLOYEES, PEOPLE WHO
MAKE THE CITY RUN.
THEY HAVE THE FREEDOM TO LIVE
FURTHER AWAY FROM DOWNTOWN LIKE
I DO PAY LESS IN RENT AS A
RESULT LIKE I DO AND STILL GET
TO WORK CAMPUS EVENTS, JOBS AND
ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITY MORE
QUICKLY AND AFFORDABLY.
>> THIS IS ABOUT PEOPLE.
THIS IS ABOUT ECONOMIC
MOBILITY, ENVIRONMENTAL
SUSTAINABILITY AND MENTAL
WELL-BEING.
I'M LIVING PROOF THAT WHEN A
CITY SUPPORTS TRANSIT ORIENTED
LIVING PEOPLE THRIVE LIKE YOU
DO
.
THANK YOU FOR YOUR WIFE KEN
GARBER.
TWENTY EIGHT YEAR CLARK MR.
HOCKEY'S COMMENTS ON RELYING
ALMOST EXCLUSIVELY ON TRANSIT
AND NON MOTORIZED
TRANSPORTATION REALLY RESONATE
WITH ME BECAUSE THAT'S HOW I'VE
CHOSEN TO LIVE TO AND I REALLY
THINK IT DOES PROMOTE ALL THE
THINGS HE'S TALKING ABOUT
INCLUDING MENTAL HEALTH.
IT'S AN OBVIOUS VERY GOOD PLACE
FOR THAT EVEN NOW I MEAN WE
HAVE A GREAT TRANSIT SYSTEM BUT
I'M NOT HERE TONIGHT.
MAYBE THE ONLY ONE HERE TONIGHT
WHO'S NOT HERE TO TALK ABOUT
THE PLAN FOR PUBLIC COMMENT.
I WANT TO BRING UP A PIPELINE
ISSUE FROM TIME TO TIME.
THIS QUESTION OF WHETHER D.C.
HAS ENOUGH ELECTRIC CAPACITY TO
SUPPORT A GIVEN DEVELOPMENT
COMES UP AT THE TABLE AND SO A
GROUP OF LOCAL BUSINESS PEOPLE
AND PROFESSIONALS, THEY'RE IN
WHAT'S CALLED THE WOLF PACK,
THIS INFORMAL ORGANIZATION.
THEY'RE CONCERNED ABOUT HOUSING
AFFORDABILITY AND ABOUT CLIMATE
CHANGE.
THEY WANT TO GET TO THE BOTTOM
OF THIS QUESTION IS ARE THEY
REALLY ARE THEY REALLY CAPACITY
DEFICITS IN ELECTRICITY IN THE
CITY SO THEY MET WITH DTI REP
AND THEY DETERMINED THAT THERE
ARE I'LL READ FROM THE MEMO
THAT THE WOLFPACK ISSUED IN
DECEMBER AND I APOLOGIZE SOME
OF YOU MAY ALREADY KNOW ABOUT
THIS BUT IF NOT AS A RESULT
OF MEETINGS BETWEEN TONY
IGNACIO'S ENGINEERING AND
PLANNING MANAGER AND AN URBAN
WARFARE CLIMATE ACTION TEAM
MEMBERS LARRY SCHMITT RICH FINE
AND JAIL JAN CULBERTSON WE HAVE
CONCLUDED THAT CLAIMS BY SOME
DEVELOPERS THAT CURRENT
CURRENTLY CANNOT PROVIDE
SUFFICIENT ELECTRIC CAPACITY
ARE EITHER UNSUPPORTED OR BASED
ON MISUNDERSTANDINGS CURRENTLY
HAS THE DISTRIBUTION CAPACITY
TO SUPPORT ALL DEVELOPMENTS
THAT HAVE BEEN SUBMITTED TO
THEM FOR REVIEW INCLUDING THOSE
WITH A DEVELOPER HAS CLAIMED
OTHERWISE.
>> ALSO BASED ON THEIR MODELING
OF FUTURE ELECTRICITY DEMAND,
THEY EXPECT TO BE ABLE TO
SUPPORT FUTURE ALL ELECTRIC
CONSTRUCTION IN WASHTENAW
COUNTY AND THE MEMO GOES ON TO
MAKE SOME OTHER
RECOMMENDATIONS.
YOU SO BASED ON THIS I'M JUST I
GUESS I WOULD SUGGEST THAT IF
YOU DO HEAR THIS CLAIM IN THE
FUTURE FROM A DEVELOPER SAYS
THAT THEY CAN'T SUPPORT AN ALL
ELECTRIC BUILDING, WE'VE GOT TO
USE GAS THAT YOU TREAT THAT
WITH THE UTMOST SKEPTICISM AND
ASK FOR EXTREMELY THOROUGH
DOCUMENTATION THAT I REALIZE
THAT YOU CANNOT MANDATE FOR
BUILDING ELECTRIFICATION BASED
ON THE UDC.
HOWEVER, I THINK THAT THIS
PARTICULAR LOOPHOLE I THINK CAN
BE BROUGHT OUT AT LEAST FOR THE
TIME BEING.
SO AGAIN, I APOLOGIZE IF YOU
ALREADY KNEW THIS JUST WANTED
TO BRING IT TO YOUR ATTENTION
AND I'LL LET YOU GET BACK TO
THE BUSINESS OF DISCUSSING THE
PLAN.
THANK YOU.
THANK YOU, MR. JAN STRIGHT.
I LIVE AT 12 VAN DUSEN.
I'VE BEEN THINKING ABOUT THESE
APARTMENTS GOING UP IN SINGLE
FAMILY NEIGHBORHOODS AND
PARKING IS NOT PROVIDED.
HOW MANY CARS WILL BE OUT ON
THE STREET?
IDEALLY PEOPLE WOULD BE WORKING
DOWNTOWN MAYBE TAKING MASS
TRANSIT BUT YOU CAN'T GUARANTEE
THAT SO MAYBE A CAR FOR EVERY
ADULT THAT'S IN THE HOUSE AND I
STARTED THINKING ABOUT WHEN I
DRIVE AROUND ANN ARBOR IT'S
CROWDED ENOUGH ALREADY.
SO HAVE TRAFFIC STUDIES BEEN
DONE ABOUT BRINGING IN THIS
MANY MORE PEOPLE INTO OUR CITY?
HOW THAT'S GOING TO AFFECT OUR
ROADS AND ESPECIALLY MENTIONING
BIKE LANES AND HOW THAT'S
NARROWS THE TRAFFIC AND
POTENTIALLY MAKES IT WORSE.
THE OTHER THING IS SINCE THIS
IS SUCH A DRAMATIC CHANGE FOR
PEOPLE THAT LIVE IN SINGLE
FAMILY NEIGHBORHOODS, HAVE WE
THOUGHT ABOUT BRINGING THIS TO
A VOTE AT SOME POINT SO THAT
EVERYBODY BECOMES AWARE OF THE
ISSUE AND HAS A VOICE?
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU
.
WOULD ANYONE ELSE INSIDE THE
CHAMBER TO ADDRESS THE PLANNING
COMMISSION
SCENE MANAGER KELLY,
DO WE HAVE PARTICIPANTS ON
ZOOME WHO HAVE INDICATED THEY'D
LIKE TO ADDRESS THE PLANNING
COMMISSION?
WE DO.
THERE ARE CURRENTLY FIVE HANDS
RAISED THE FIRST CALLER IS
ANTHONY .
DO YOU HAVE PERMISSION TO
ADDRESS PLANNING PERMISSION FOR
THREE MINUTES?
>> I THANK YOU.
MY NAME IS ANTHONY DAVIS.
OLIVIA TWO, FOUR, THREE, FOUR.
LAURA WOULD CIRCLE WARD THREE.
I WORK AS A LIBRARY TECHNICIAN
FOR THE ANN DISTRICT LIBRARY
AND I'M AGAINST SPEAKING IN
SUPPORT OF THE ENTIRE COMMUNITY
LAND TRUST.
I WAS FORTUNATE ENOUGH TO
RESERVE A HOUSE SMALL HOUSE ON
THIRTEEN SIXTY NINE JEWITT AVE.
FOR TWO HUNDRED AND TWENTY FIVE
THOUSAND AS A RESULT OF A
LOTTERY THROUGH THE ENTIRE
COMMUNITY AND TRUST.
BUT BEFORE THEY CAN BREAK
GROUND ON THESE NEW SMALLER
HOMES THEY NEED THE CITY'S
APPROVAL TO BUILD TWO SMALL
HOMES LIKE MINE ON THIS DEEP
LOT ON JEWITT AND ON OTHERS
THAT THEY OWN THROUGHOUT THE
COMMUNITY.
THEY ALSO NEED THEIR HOUSING TO
REQUEST APPROVED SO THEY CAN
OBTAIN ADDITIONAL FUNDS TO
BUILD THESE HOMES AT AFFORDABLE
PRICES.
THIS COULD TAKE OVER TWO YEARS
TO HAPPEN.
I RECENTLY LEARNED I'M JUST
ASKING THAT YOU PLEASE CONSIDER
EXPEDITING THE APPROVAL PROCESS
FOR THEIR EFFORTS.
I WORRY THAT FAMILIES AND
INDIVIDUALS THAT ARE READY FOR
THESE HOMES AT THESE PRICES
TODAY WILL BE ABLE TO IN TWO
YEARS DUE TO TERRORISTS
POSSIBLY INCREASING THE COST
OF NEW HOME CONSTRUCTION.
LET'S HELP THE NO LAND TRUSTS
WEATHER THE STORM AND BUILD
AFFORDABLE HOUSING HOUSES NOW
THANK YOU FOR YOUR TIME.
THANK YOU.
OUR NEXT CALLER IS BRADDY
PERMISSION TO ADDRESS PLANNING
COMMISSION.
THANK YOU, RED FRITZ THIRTY
THIRTY LEXINGTON THE SECOND
WARD COMMISSIONERS.
LET ME FIRST SAY LET ME GIVE
YOU MY PERSONAL THANKS FOR
SERVING IN A VOLUNTEER
CAPACITY.
I HAVE SERVED ON VOLUNTEER
BOARDS AS WELL AND WE JOKE A
LOT THAT THIS IS WHY WE GET
PAID THE BIG BUCKS NOT SO THANK
YOU.
I AM ONE OF THE SIGNATOR TO THE
MEMO PRESENTED BY MR. BARRETT.
LET'S PAUSE THIS PLAN.
IT'S ALLEGED THAT WELL THIS IS
JUST A ROADMAP.
WELL OK.
IT'S A ROADMAP TOWARD A
MOONSHOT FAR MORE AGGRESSIVE
THAN THE FACTS AND DETAILS
WARRANT.
LET'S DIAL IT BACK AND A
PARTICULAR CONCERN LET'S LOOK
AT WHAT WE'VE ALREADY DONE
MEASURES THAT ARE VERY
PROMISING BUT HAVE YET TO YIELD
REAL RESULTS.
THE ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS
PAST SOME YEARS AGO WHICH IF MY
MEMORY SERVES ONLY ABOUT 40
HAVE BEEN BUILT THE ONE ZONING
WHICH ONLY ONE VERY LARGE
PROJECT IN THE WORKS AND THAT
WE ARE SURPRISED TO SEE DEPENDS
ON ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTY
MILLION DOLLARS OF CITY FUNDING
FOR PARKING STRUCTURES.
AND LASTLY AND THIS I REALIZE
IS NOT A PLANNING COMMISSION
ISSUE BUT LET ME URGE YOU TO
USE YOUR ELBOWS TO OK YOUR
COLLEAGUES AND CITY COUNCIL.
WHY DO WE STILL HAVE TWENTY
YEARS LATER ON ANN ARBOR WHY
LOT OWNED BY THE CITY PURPOSED
FOR AFFORDABLE HOUSING THAT
REMAINS A PARKING LOT SO THE
THE BOOKS AND APPROACH THE
STRONG TOWNS MOVEMENT SAY TAKE
SMALL STEPS, REVIEW, FIX,
ADJUST AND TAKE ANOTHER WHACK.
STEPHEN SCHWARTZ, THE COMPOSER
OF MANY MUSICALS INCLUDING
WICKED AND A WONDERFUL LINE
THERE IS NO JOURNEY GONE SO FAR
WE CANNOT STOP AND CHANGE
DIRECTION.
THANK YOU.
THANK YOU
.
NICE COLOR.
WELL WITH YOUR PERMISSION TO
VISIT COMMISSION GREETINGS
PLANNING COMMISSION AND CITY
PLANNING STAFF.
THIS IS LUIS VASQUEZ FROM NINE
ZERO NINE BERTEN DRIVE IN UPPER
LOWER TOWN.
I'M CALLING TONIGHT TO URGE YOU
NOT TO DELAY THIS PROCESS, NOT
TO STOP THIS PROCESS, NOT TO
PAUSE THIS PROCESS.
WHAT I'VE JUST WITNESSED OTHER
THAN A FEW SPOKE ABOUT
TRANSITIONS, ZONES AND TRANSIT
INTO AND OUT OF THE CITY TO THE
NEIGHBORHOODS.
WHAT I'VE WITNESSED IS A LOT
OF FEAR MONGERING FROM SOME
VERY PRIVILEGED SINGLE FAMILY
HOMEOWNERS.
I'M ONE OF THOSE TOO.
BUT I DON'T SEE ANY REASON TO
PAUSE THIS PROCESS AT THIS
TIME.
I URGE YOU TO FORGE AHEAD.
YOU HAVE A LOT OF DATA THAT HAS
BEEN COLLECTED FROM ALL THE
PUBLIC MEETINGS THAT AND
ENGAGEMENT SESSIONS THAT HAVE
BEEN HELD.
I ADMIRE THE WORK THAT YOU'VE
DONE OVER THE PAST.
WHAT IS IT NOW?
NINETEEN TWENTY MONTHS OF THIS
PLAN PROCESS AND I THINK YOU'VE
ALL DONE A GREAT JOB AND I'M
GOING TO ASK HOW MANY OF THESE
CONCERNED NIMBY RESIDENTS ARE
GOING TO STAY FOR THE WHOLE
MEETING TONIGHT AND WATCH AND
OBSERVE AS YOU DIALOG AND WORK
THROUGH THE ISSUES THAT ARE
INHERENT IN THE COMPREHENSIBLY
PLAN.
HOW MANY ARE GOING TO STAY
THROUGH THE WHOLE MEETING
TONIGHT?
I DOUBT THAT VERY MANY WILL.
THANK YOU FOR YOUR TIME AND
HAVE A GREAT NIGHT.
THANK YOU ALEX.
I HAVE THREE MINUTES TO
DESCRIBE COMMISSIONER
NOSTROMO.
YOU HAVE THREE MINUTES TO
ADDRESS THE PLANNING COMMISSION
HIATUSES FROM FREYDBERG BURRARD
IN PARTICULAR VILLAGE THREE
STATO BY ASKING WHY SO MANY
PEOPLE WANT MY HOME IN MY
NEIGHBORHOOD TO BE IN NEED
OF FOOD HAD A LOT OF PUBLIC
COMMENTS.
>> THEY'RE SAYING HOW IT'S
IMPOSSIBLE TO TO BUILD A
NEIGHBORHOOD LIKE THE ONE IN
WHICH I'M LIVING AND HOMES LIKE
ONE OF WHICH I'M GOING TO BE
SAYING THAT STREET FOR US WOULD
BE IMPOSSIBLE.
NEVER MIND THE FACT THAT MY CAR
IS CURRENTLY PARKED
ON THE
STREET OUTSIDE MY HOUSE.
WE IT'S IT SEEMS TO ME VERY
BACKWARDS TO ME AND PEOPLE THEN
WORRY ABOUT THEIR NEIGHBORHOOD
WHICH CHANGING WHAT OTHER
PEOPLE ARE LIVING ON THE STREET
BECAUSE THEY CANNOT FIND HOMES
THAT IT'S BECAUSE WE HAVE THIS
MASSIVE HOUSING CRISIS.
OUR COMPREHENSIVE PLAN IS AT
LEAST FIVE YEARS OVERDUE.
>> I THINK THAT'S SLOWING DOWN
EVEN FURTHER IS A HUGE MISTAKE.
THEY'VE ALREADY MISTAKES IN
THIS COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
>> THESE PLEASE LET'S NOT
COMPOUND THANK YOU.
>> THANK YOU.
TWO MORE COLUMNS PHONE NUMBER
ANY THREE TO SIX YOU PERMISSION
TO GO AS PLANNING COMMISSION
.
THANK YOU, JEFF.
CRACKUP WHOM YOU CAN HEAR ME WE
CAN OK THANK YOU.
I LIVE AT FIVE OR SIX EAST
KINGSLY INCREASING DENSITY IS A
CENTRAL GOAL OF THE CONFERENCE
PLAN YET THERE ARE VIRTUALLY NO
DENSITY DATA PROVIDED AND THE
PLAN TO ESTABLISH A BASELINE
ACCORDING TO THE WORD RURAL
POPULATION REVIEW AND YOU CAN
CHECK OUT THEIR WEBSITE AND I
QUOTE ANN ARBOR HAS THE TWO
THOUSAND TWENTY FIVE POPULATION
OF ONE HUNDRED SIXTEEN THOUSAND
FIVE HUNDRED SIXTY ONE.
IT IS ALSO THE COUNTRY SEAT
OF WASHTENAW COUNTY.
ANN ARBOR IS CURRENTLY
DECLINING AT A RATE OF ONE
POINT TWO PERCENT ANNUALLY AND
ITS POPULATION IS DECREASED BY
FIVE POINT SEVEN PERCENT SINCE
THE MOST RECENT CENSUS WHICH
RECORDED A POPULATION OF ONE
HUNDRED TWENTY THREE THOUSAND
SIX HUNDRED 2020 WITH AN AREA
OF TWENTY EIGHT POINT THREE
THREE MILES THE DENSITY IS
CURRENTLY FOUR THOUSAND ONE
HUNDRED FOURTEEN RESIDENTS PER
SQUARE MILE.
THE DATA SHOULD BE INCLUDED IN
THIS PLAN AND IT IS NOT MORE
PROBLEM THAN THE PLAN CALLS FOR
REMOVING SINGLE FAMILY ZONING
WITHOUT ANY DATA INDICATE THE
COMPARATIVE DENSITY
NEIGHBORHOODS ACROSS THE CITY,
DIFFERENCES IN DENSITY ACROSS
THE CITY TO BE CONSIDERED IN
DETERMINING WHETHER OR NOT
CITYWIDE ZONING IS WARRANTED.
>> INTERESTINGLY, THE DDA ONCE
PROVIDED POPULATION DATA ON THE
DOWNTOWN AND ITS STATE OF THE
DOWNTOWN REPORT BUT THE LAST
ANNUAL REPORT IN 2019.
WHY WERE THESE REPORTS THAT
ACCORDING TO MAUREEN THOMPSON
THE DENHA DIRECTOR OF THE DENHA
CURRENTLY LACKS CAPACITY TO
PRODUCE THE REPORT?
TO ME THAT TRANSLATES TO
PRODUCING A REPORT IS WHAT
COUNCIL PRIORITY WHAT THE
CURRENT FOCUS ON GENTRIFICATION
?
>> IT WOULD SEEM THAT THE DENHA
STATED THE DOWNTOWN REPORT
MERIT MUCH HIGHER PRIORITY.
THESE REPORTS PROVIDED
IMPORTANT INFORMATION THAT
COULD HAVE BEEN USED IN THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN BUT WEREN'T
TO SEE THESE REPORTS GO TO THE
DENHA WEBSITE.
UNFORTUNATELY I WAS UNABLE TO
FIND OUT HOW MANY CURRENT
RESIDENTS LIVE DOWNTOWN OR WHAT
THE DOWNTOWN DENSITY CURRENTLY
IS.
BUT THESE ARE DEVELOPMENT BEING
PLANNED FOR THE AREA NEAR A
PUBLIC LIBRARY.
THERE ARE POTENTIALLY MORE THAN
TWO THOUSAND NEW RESIDENTS
DOWNTOWN.
OUR IMPACT THIS HOW WILL THAT
IMPACT DENSITY DOWNTOWN VOTERS
SHOULD BE TOLD PRIOR TO THE
AUGUST CROP AND B VOTE TO OTHER
CITY APARTMENT APARTMENTS HAVE
THIS INFORMATION IT WOULD BE
USEFUL TO FIND OUT ADDING TWO
THOUSAND NEW RESIDENTS WITHOUT
ADDING PARK SPACE SEEMS LIKE A
VERY BAD IDEA AND COUNTER TO
THE TWO THOUSAND TWENTY THREE
TWO THOUSAND TWENTY SEVEN
PROPOSED PLAN THE ABSENCE
OF DENSITY DATA AND THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN SHOULD GIVE
YOU ALL PAUSE.
PLEASE INCLUDE DENSITY DATA AND
GOLD BEFORE FINALIZING THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
>> THANKS FOR YOUR
CONSIDERATION.
THANK YOU SHANNON.
YOU HAVE PERMISSION TO ADDRESS
PLANNING COMMISSION.
HELLO COMMISSIONER SHANNON LO
TWO EIGHT SEVEN ZERO OAKDALE
DRIVE.
I'M HERE TO VOICE MY SUPPORT
FOR BUILDING MORE HOUSING AND
INCREASING DENSITY IN ANN
ARBOR.
I THINK RIGHT NOW WE'RE AT
JUNCTION AND HAVE THIS
OPPORTUNITY TO WORK TO UNDO
HUNDREDS DECADES OF YEARS
OF RACIALLY MOTIVATED ZONING
AND EXCLUSIONARY PRACTICES AS
WELL AS WORK TOWARDS A MORE
SUSTAINABLE AND ARBOR.
THERE WERE REALLY, REALLY
COMMENTS THROUGHOUT THIS
MEETING.
I THINK AN EARLIER CALLER MAYBE
BRAD WAS A NAME MENTIONED HOW
THERE HAVE BEEN CHANGES THERE
HAVE BEEN POLICY ATTEMPTS TO
INCREASE DENSITY.
YOU HAVE YOU ALLOWANCE TO BUILD
IT IS SIXTY ONE IS A RELATIVELY
RECENT ZONING BUT THERE HASN'T
BEEN MUCH PROGRESS ON THAT AND
WE WILL WE'VE ALSO SPOKE TO THE
FACT THAT THERE ARE AREAS THAT
ALLOW BOTH COMMERCIAL AND
RESIDENTIAL BUT ONLY COMMERCIAL
HAD BEEN BUILT AND IT GOES TO
SHOW THAT EVEN IF THE ZONE
ALLOWS FOR HOUSING IT DOESN'T
NECESSARILY MEAN THAT IT WILL
BE BUILT AND SO WHILE THERE ARE
PEOPLE THAT ARE SHOUTING FOR
GENTLE DENSITY OR GENTLE
INCREMENTAL GROWTH, WE DON'T
NECESSARILY GET THAT
INCREMENTALLY ZONING.
WE GET THAT BY PERMITTING
HOUSING WHERE POSSIBLE.
SPECIFICALLY I'M HERE TO
ADVOCATE FOR ELIMINATING
FLECK'S DISTRICT, INCREASING
THE AREAS THAT THE TRANSITION
DISTRICT APPLIES TO
SPECIFICALLY FOR NON R ONE OR
TWO DISTRICTS AS WELL AS
INCREASING HEIGHT LIMITS OR
REMOVING ENTIRELY FROM A
TRANSITION DISTRICT AS LONG AS
THEY'RE NOT NEAR RESIDENTIAL
AREAS.
>> IN ADDITION, I THINK THERE
ARE OTHER COMMENTS ABOUT
INFRASTRUCTURE DENSITY IS KNOWN
TO BE THE ENGINEERS ARE KNOWN
TO BE MORE EFFICIENT IN
PROVIDING INFRASTRUCTURE.
NOT ONLY IS THE TAX BASE
INCREASED BUT YOU'RE PROVIDING
IT IN A MUCH SMALLER AREA AND
SO I FORESEE NO SIGNIFICANT
ISSUES AND I'D ACTUALLY BE MORE
SUSTAINABLE IN THE LONG RUN
BROLGAS AND FOR PEOPLE WHO ARE
CONCERNED ABOUT CONGESTION,
TRUST ME I I DON'T HAVE A CAR I
WOULD LOVE TO MOVE SOMEWHERE
DOWNTOWN AND I PROMISE I'M NOT
BRINGING ANOTHER PARKING SPOT.
>> YEAH, THERE A LOT OF US HERE
WHO WANT TO LIVE DOWNTOWN I
WANT TO LOOK CLOSER BUT WE
CAN'T SO BUILDING MORE HOUSING
LOT PEOPLE IN DENHA SUSTAINABLY
IS REALLY IMPORTANT.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
THERE THERE ARE NO OTHER
CALLERS AT THIS TIME.
>> GREAT.
DID JUST ONE LAST CALL FOR
ANYONE IN THE CHAMBER TO GIVE A
PUBLIC COMMENT BEFORE I CLOSED
THE PUBLIC COMMENT.
OK, SEE AGAIN WE'RE GOING TO
CLOSE PUBLIC COMMENT AND AS I
DID LAST WEEK JUST WANT TO GIVE
COMMISSIONERS A MOMENT IF
THEY'D LIKE TO ADDRESS ANYTHING
WE HEARD DURING PUBLIC COMMENT
FOR A COUPLE OF MINUTES.
ALL RIGHT.
WE'LL START WITH COUNCIL MEMBER
JOSH.
OH, NO.
WE'LL START WITH COMMISSIONER
ADAM.
>> SO I WAS STRUCK BY WHERE A
CALLER BRADLEY GETS I THINK
BROUGHT UP A USED ONE IN
WILLOTT AND I THINK THOSE ARE
INTERESTING EXAMPLES BECAUSE TO
ME THEY CAN JUST AS EASILY BE
LOOKED FROM A DIFFERENT LENS.
SO LAST WEEK I SPOKE ABOUT HOW
GRADUAL AND GRADUAL LAND USE
REFORMS ARE IN TERMS OF HOW
THOSE LEGAL CHANGES GET
CONVERTED INTO DEVELOPMENT EVEN
IN CITIES THAT HAVE UNDERTAKEN
VERY AGGRESSIVELY PRO HOUSING
LAND USE REFORMS.
I WENT BACK AND PULLED THE CLIP
SO APRIL 1ST PROFESSOR FROM U
OF M LAW SCHOOL NOER CASES CAME
AND SPOKE IN FRONT OF THIS BODY
ABOUT THE EXPERIENCE
OF HOUSTON, TEXAS, WHICH HE
DESCRIBED I THINK CORRECTLY AS
THE POSTER CHILD FOR MASS
IDENTIFICATION CONVERSION
OF SINGLE FAMILY HOMES.
NOW WHEN HE SPOKE HE MENTIONED
THAT OVER A 15 YEAR PERIOD
HOUSTON WHICH IS THE FOURTH
LARGEST CITY IN US BY
POPULATION SAW A GRAND TOTAL
OF JUST THIRTEEN CONVERSIONS
OF SINGLE FAMILY HOMES TO
MULTIFAMILY HOUSING.
I WOULD ENCOURAGE FOLKS WHO ARE
CONCERNED ABOUT THE CHANGES TO
SINGLE FAMILY ZONING TO GO BACK
AND WATCH PROFESSOR CASEY'S
REMARKS BUT ALSO TO LOOK AT THE
EXAMPLES THAT MR. PRETZ JUST
PROVIDED BECAUSE THERE WERE
ONES VERY SIMILAR CONCERNS
ARTICULATED ABOUT THE IMPACTS
OF THESE REFORMS AS WELL.
AND I THINK AS MR. PITTS NOTED,
THE 80 ORDINANCE PROMPTED
CONCERNS THAT WE WERE
EFFECTIVELY ELIMINATING SINGLE
FAMILY ZONING AND THAT HAS NOT
COME TO PASS THE ONE DISTRICT
IN ITS ROLLOUT WERE SIMILARLY
CONTROVERSIAL AND THAT WAS
SIMILAR FEARS THAT
NEIGHBORHOODS WOULD BE TOWERED
OVER BY LARGE BUILDINGS AND
DISRUPTED AND THAT ALSO HAS NOT
COME TO PASS EVEN THE WILLOTT
WHICH IS A CITY OWNED PARCEL.
WE HAVE A MUCH FREER HAND TO DO
WHAT WE WANT WITH A WITH A
PARCEL LIKE THAT THAT'S BEEN
VERY SLOW TO CONVERT INTO
HOUSING.
I THINK THESE EXAMPLES MIRROR
NATIONAL EXPERIENCE AND I THINK
THEY SHOULD PROVIDE INDIVIDUALS
WHO ARE CONCERNED ABOUT THE
PACE AND SCALE OF CHANGE SOME
COMFORT .
>> THANK YOU, COMMISSIONER
ADAMS.
COUNCIL MEMBER JOSH THANK YOU.
CHAIR AND COMMISSIONER ADAMS.
SO I TOO WANTED TO MAKE A QUICK
REMARK ABOUT THE WILLOTT THE
ANN ARBOR HOUSING CORPORATION
WAIT.
>> YES.
YES.
OF COMMISSION INCORPORATION.
THEY'RE BOTH THEY HAVE FOUND A
DEVELOPMENT PARTNER NAMED
RELATED MIDWEST WHICH WILL BE
BUILDING THREE HUNDRED HOMES
ALL AFFORDABLE ON THAT LOT.
>> SO THAT IS MOVING FORWARD.
THERE'S A LOT OF CONCERN
EXPRESSED TONIGHT ABOUT
POPULATION GROWTH NUMBERS BEING
INFLATED IN THE PLAN GIVEN THAT
ANN ARBOR IS POPULATION
DECREASED FROM 2020 TO 2024.
I WANT TO MAKE TWO POINTS ABOUT
THAT.
MY FIRST POINT IS THAT
AFFORDABILITY MAY WELL HAVE
SOMETHING TO DO WITH OUR
DECREASING POPULATION NUMBERS
BETWEEN 2013 AND 2023 ANN ARBOR
SAW A MEANINGFUL INCREASE IN
HOUSEHOLDS IN ONLY ONE INCOME
CATEGORY THOSE EARNING 150000
AND OVER.
WE ADDED 6000 HOUSEHOLDS AT
THAT RATE OF EARNING WE LOST
ALMOST 4000 HOUSEHOLDS EARNING
50 PERCENT AM AND BELOW THE
INCREASES IN THE MEDIAN INCOME
HAVE BEEN FAR OUTPACED BY
INCREASES IN MEDIAN RENT IN ANN
ARBOR AND THIS BECAME
PARTICULARLY TRUE UP UNTIL
2019.
THOSE WERE CLOSELY ALIGNED.
SINCE THEN MEDIAN INCOME HAS
DECLINED WHILE MEDIAN RENT HAS
INCREASED.
SO POINT ONE IS THAT GROWTH IN
OUR HOUSING SUPPLY CAN AFFECT
WHETHER WE'LL SEE MORE OR LESS
POPULATION GROWTH IN ANN ARBOR
CURRENTLY AT OUR CURRENT
VACANCY RATE RENTAL VACANCY
RATE OF THREE POINT FIVE
PERCENT.
THERE'S NOT SUPPLY FOR PEOPLE
WHO MIGHT WANT TO BE HERE POINT
TO WHEN WE'RE THINKING ABOUT
HOUSING NEEDS.
IT'S A MISTAKE TO FOCUS SOLELY
ON POPULATION NUMBERS HOUSEHOLD
FORMATION IS A BETTER INDICATOR
OF DEMAND FOR HOUSING NOW
HOUSEHOLD FORMATION IS WHAT
HAPPENS WHEN YOUR KID MOVES OUT
AND LOOKS FOR A PLACE OF THEIR
OWN OR WHEN SOMEONE COMES TO
ANN ARBOR TO TAKE UP A JOB AS A
RESIDENT FOR EXAMPLE, YOU KNOW,
AT THE AT A HOSPITAL OR YOU
KNOW, OTHER THINGS LIKE THAT
FROM 2013 TO 2023, MICHIGAN SAW
A FIVE PERCENT INCREASE IN
HOUSEHOLD FORMATION THAT IS
SIGNIFICANT AND IT IS DRIVEN IN
PART BY THE POPULATION BUMP
THAT DEMOGRAPHERS CALL THE
MILLENNIALS AND IT IS ALSO
DRIVEN BY PEOPLE'S PREFERENCES
FOR SMALLER HOUSEHOLDS.
>> SO THERE ARE MORE PEOPLE
LOOKING FOR HOMES OF THEIR OWN
AND THERE ARE FEWER HOMES BEING
CONSTRUCTED SINCE 2008 THAN
THERE WERE PRIOR TO THAT.
SO FROM TWENTY SEVENTEEN TO
TWENTY TWENTY THREE THERE WAS A
22 PERCENT DROP IN SINGLE
FAMILY HOUSING CREATION AND A
16 PERCENT DROP IN MULTIFAMILY
RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS THAT YOU
CAN'T REMEMBER ANY OTHER
COMMISSIONERS
.
>> COMMISSIONER MILSONS, I JUST
WANT TO CONTINUE TO THANK
PEOPLE FOR PARTICIPATING IN
THIS PROCESS FOR PEOPLE WHO'VE
COME BEFORE AND SHARING YOUR
THOUGHTS AGAIN WITH US FOR
PEOPLE WHO THIS IS THE VERY
FIRST TIME.
THANK YOU FOR COMING OUT AND
PARTICIPATING.
PART OF WHY WE'VE BEEN DOING
THIS AND HAVING MANY MEETINGS
OVER THIS AND STARTING EARLIER
IN THE DAY FOR PEOPLE IS SO
THAT WE CAN HAVE PUBLIC
ENGAGEMENT AND PUBLIC COMMENT
ABOUT THIS.
THIS IS A FIRST DRAFT AND SO I
WANT TO AGAIN THANK YOU FOR
COMING.
THANK YOU, COMMISSIONER MILLS.
MR. WARNER, I JUST HAVE A QUICK
QUESTION FROM A COMMENTER THAT
I WANTED TO PUT ON YOUR RADAR
WHICH WAS AROUND I THINK IT WAS
KENSINGTON IS CURRENTLY ZONED R
ONE B BUT BUT ONE IF THE LAN
USE DESIGNATIONS WHICH DO NOT
IMMEDIATELY TRANSLATE TRANSLATE
INTO ZONING DESIGNATIONS ARE TO
TAKE EFFECT IN THAT SPACE.
HOW LIKELY IS IT FOR THAT TO
BECOME LIGHT INDUSTRIAL WOULD
BE BETTER BUT IN ONE UNLIKELY
WHEN WE GET INCREASE OFTEN
ABOUT TRANSITIONAL PROPERTIES
WHAT WE DO IS COMMUNICATE HOW
THE MAP IS RENDERED AT THIS
TIME WE DO OUR VERY TRANSPARENT
HONEST TO SAY THAT IT'S A DRAFT
PLAN AND UNTIL THE PLAN IS
ADOPTED THINGS ARE POSSIBLE BUT
THAT WE ARE NOT RECOMMENDING
WIDE CHANGES TO THOSE ADJACENT
LAND USES.
>> THANK YOU SIR.
SO THAT SHOULD ANSWER THE
QUESTION THAT YOU POST IN YOUR
COMMENTS AND FOR THE COMMISSION
THE VERY MEMO CAME IN I STOPPED
READING COMMENTS AT ABOUT
FOURTH THIRTY I WAS UP TO FORTY
SIX AND THIS ONE SEEMS TO BE
NO.
FORTY NINE IN YOUR PACKET SO IT
CAME IN SOME TIME BETWEEN FOUR
THIRTY AND FIVE THIRTY BUT IT
IS INCLUDED IN YOUR PACKET AND
SO UNFORTUNATELY I DON'T THINK
MANY OF US HAD AN OPPORTUNITY
TO READ PRIOR TO TAKING OUR
SEATS TONIGHT BUT WE WILL TAKE
A LOOK AT WHAT YOU INCLUDED
WITH THAT WE WILL GO NOW TO
ITEM NUMBER SEVEN ON OUR AGENDA
PUBLIC HEARINGS FOR THE NEXT
SCHEDULED BUSINESS MEETING P
MANAGER KELLY, WHAT DO YOU HAVE
FOR US FOR THE TUESDAY MAY 20TH
CITY PLANNING COMMISSION
MEETING NOTING THAT THIS WILL
START AT YOUR USUAL TIME
OF SEVEN PM THERE IS THREE OR
THREE DETROIT STREET SIDE PLAN
FOR PLANNING COMMISSION
APPROVAL A PROPOSED PLAN TO
CONVERT 303 DETROIT STREET FROM
AN OFFICE AND RETAIL BUILDING
TO A RESIDENTIAL BUILDING WITH
SIXTEEN UNITS BY ADDING
APPROXIMATELY 10000 SQUARE FEET
.
CONSTRUCTION INCLUDES BUILDING
AN ADDITIONAL FLOOR ON TOP
OF THE EXISTING BUILDINGS,
ADDING BALCONIES AND CREATING A
PARKING GARAGE IN THE BASEMENT
ACCESS BY ROTATING AUTOMOBILE
ELEVATOR FROM A NEW DRIVEWAY UP
NORTH FOURTH AVENUE.
THE SITE IS IN THE D TO
DOWNTOWN INTERFACE BASED ZONING
DISTRICT CARRIE TOWN CHARACTER
OVER THE DISTRICT AND HAS A
SECONDARY STREET TYPE
DESIGNATION THE SECOND OF THE
THREE PUBLIC HEARINGS YOU HAVE
IS SIX TWENTY FIVE CHURCH
STREET, A SITE PLANNED FOR
PLANNING COMMISSION APPROVAL.
A PROPOSED SITE PLAN TO
REDEVELOP SIX TWENTY ONE CHURCH
STREET SIX TWENTY FIVE CHURCH
STREET SIX THIRTY THREE CHURCH
STREET AND ONE TWO ZERO SEVEN
WILLARD STREET PLUS AN AREA
EXTENDING OVER SIX ONE SIX
HOUSE FOREST TO CONSTRUCT A
TWENTY STORY APARTMENT BUILDING
OF APPROXIMATELY TWO HUNDRED
AND EIGHTY UNITS TWO HUNDRED
AND EIGHTY THOUSAND SQUARE FEET
OF FLOOR AREA IN ONE HUNDRED
AND NINETY FIVE FEET IN HEIGHT
THE SITE IS SIXTEEN THOUSAND
FIFTY SQUARE FEET AND IS IN THE
ONE DOWNTOWN CORE BASED ZONING
DISTRICT S UNIVERSITY CHARACTER
OVERLAYED DISTRICT AND HAS A
PRIMARY STREET TYPE
DESIGNATION.
THE THIRD OF YOUR PUBLIC
HEARINGS IS SIX THIRTY S ASHLEY
STREET, A SITE PLANNED FOR
PLANNING COMMISSION APPROVAL.
THIS IS A PROPOSED SITE PLAN TO
CONSTRUCT TWO SINGLE FAMILY
HOMES WITH A GARAGE BETWEEN
THEM PLUS A DETACHED GARAGE AND
A SECOND STORY RESIDENTIAL
UNIT.
IT IS A FORMER ERMIN CLEANER
SITE.
IT IS POINT ONE SEVEN ACRES
CURRENTLY VACANT AND IN DC TO
BE BUSINESS SERVICE DISTRICT
ZONING WITH IN THE OLD WEST
SIDE HISTORIC DISTRICT AS WELL
.
THE PROJECT HAS RECEIVED
HISTORIC DISTRICT COMMISSION
APPROVAL AND VARIANCES FROM THE
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS.
>> THANK YOU MANAGER KELLY.
THAT TAKES US TO AGENDA ITEM
EIGHT A UNFINISHED BUSINESS
THERE IS NONE AND WE MOVE TO
REGULAR BUSINESS WE HAVE BEFORE
US A IN APPROVAL OR A PROPOSAL
FOR APPROVAL.
IT'S THREE ONE THREE TO THREE
TO SEVEN ON SITE PLAN FOR
PLANNING COMMISSION APPROVAL A
PROPOSED SEVEN STOREY BUILDING
WITH THIRTY EIGHT RESIDENTIAL
CONDOMINIUM UNITS.
THIRTY THREE PARKING SPACES
WILL BE PROVIDED ON SITE
VEHICLE ACCESS TO THE SITE IS
PROPOSED FROM THE EXISTING
ALLEYWAY BETWEEN CATHERINE
STREET AND EAST KINGSLEE STREET
.
THE DEVELOPMENT WOULD REQUIRE
DEMOLITION AND REMOVAL OF THE
CURRENT STRUCTURES THE PROJECT
IS PURSUING LEED SILVER
CERTIFICATION AND IS ZONED D TO
DOWNTOWN INTERFACE STAFF
RECOMMENDATION FOR THIS IS
APPROVAL.
>> SO WE'RE GOING TO START WITH
THE PETITIONER'S PRESENTATION
SO YOU CAN COME TO THE PODIUM.
YOU'LL HAVE TEN MINUTES TO MAKE
THAT PRESENTATION THEN YOU WILL
HEAR FROM STAFF AND THEN WE'LL
HAVE A PUBLIC HEARING AND THE
COMMISSION WILL HAVE ITS
DISCUSSION.
WELCOME AND STUFF
.
GOOD EVENING EVERYBODY.
I'M CANICE WITH MIDWESTERN
CONSULTING.
I AM HERE TONIGHT WITH LORCAN
O'HERLIHY FROM WORK IN
O'HERLIHY ARCHITECTS AS WELL AS
SOME REPRESENTATIVES FROM WRP
BRONN LLC, THE OWNERSHIP GROUP
FOR THIS PROPERTY AND I'M HAPPY
TO TALK ABOUT BRONKHORST.
SO JUST FOR A LITTLE CONTEXT, I
THINK EVERYONE KNOWS WHERE THIS
IS BUT THE SITE IS COMPRISED
OF SEVEN EXISTING PARCELS ON
RANCOURT.
IT'S ALONG THE WEST SIDE
OF NORTH FOURTH IMMEDIATELY TO
THE FARMERS MARKET.
DUNBAR TOWER IS CURRENTLY UNDER
CONSTRUCTION IMMEDIATELY SOUTH
OF THIS SITE.
>> SO THE PROPERTY IS OWNED D
TO DOWNTOWN INTERFACE.
IT'S LOCATED IN THE REALLY A
DISTRICT.
THE FARMER'S MARKET IS ON
PUBLIC LANDS BUT EVERYTHING
ADJACENT TO THIS PROPERTY IS
ALSO ZONED TO THE FUTURE LAND
USE DESIGNATION IS DOWNTOWN
INTERFACE CONSISTENT WITH THE
ZONING IT'S ALSO WITHIN THE
BOUNDARY WE DID HOLD OUR
CITIZEN PARTICIPATION MEETING
IN JULY OF LAST YEAR.
THE POSTCARDS WERE MAILED OUT
IN LATE JUNE TO ALL THE
PROPERTIES WITHIN A THOUSAND
FEET OF THE SITE.
WE DID SEND OVER THIRTEEN
HUNDRED AND FIFTY POSTCARDS
JUST UNDER TWO HUNDRED OF THOSE
CAME BACK TO US AS
UNDELIVERABLE BUT WE DID HAVE
RELATIVELY GOOD TURNOUT AT THE
MEETING.
WE DID ALSO RECEIVE SOME ONE
PHONE CALL AND SOME ADDITIONAL
EMAILS OUTSIDE OF THE MEETING
WITH COMMENTS AND QUESTIONS AND
THEN COPIES OF ALL OF THAT
CORRESPONDENCE AS WELL AS THE
PARTICIPANT LIST PRESENTATION
MATERIALS.
ALL OF THAT WAS SUBMITTED WITH
THE SITE PLAN MATERIALS.
>> SO AS FAR AS EXISTING
CONDITIONS GO, THE SITE IS
COMPRISED OF SEVEN PARCELS AS I
MENTIONED, WHICH TOGETHER ARE
JUST UNDER FOUR TENTHS OF AN
ACRE.
ALL THE EXISTING STRUCTURES
WILL BE REMOVED AS PART OF THE
PROPOSED DEVELOPMENT THE
EXISTING UTILITY EASEMENTS AND
THE RIGHT OF WAY THAT KIND
OF RUN THROUGH THE MIDDLE
OF THE SITE WILL BE VACATED AND
ALL THE PARCELS WILL BE
COMBINED AT THE CONCLUSION
OF THIS PROCESS.
SO WE ARE PROPOSING A SEVEN
STOREY RESIDENTIAL BUILDING
THAT HAS THIRTY SIX UNITS.
SUSTAINABILITY COMPONENTS ARE
BEING PROVIDED TO ACHIEVE THE
THIRTY PERCENT INCREASE IN
MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHT SO IT
WOULD INCREASE THE MAXIMUM
HEIGHT FROM SIXTY FEET TO
SEVENTY EIGHT FEET.
WE'RE PROPOSING SEVENTY SEVEN
FEET I THINK VEHICLE PARKING IS
WITHIN AND BENEATH THE BUILDING
SO THERE ARE FIVE SPACES AT
GRADE THAT ARE TUCKED INSIDE
THE BUILDING AND THEN THERE'S
AN ADDITIONAL TWENTY EIGHT
SPACES ON A LEVEL UNDERNEATH
IT'S ACCESS FROM THE ALLEY ALL
THE ECLECTUS IS FROM THE PUBLIC
ON THE WEST SIDE THE SITE THERE
ARE FOUR EXISTING ON-STREET
PARKING SPACES ON FOURTH THAT
ARE IMMEDIATELY ADJACENT TO
THIS PROPERTY FRONTAGE.
ALL THOSE SPACES WILL BE
MAINTAINED.
ONE OF THEM WILL BE SHIFTED A
LITTLE BIT SOUTH TO ACCOMMODATE
ACCESS FOR A NEW FIRE HYDRANT
BUT THERE WILL STILL BE FOUR
SPACES THERE IN TOTAL THERE'S
ALSO TWENTY FOUR BICYCLE SPACES
BEING PROPOSED WITHIN THE
BUILDING AND THEN A NEW HOOP ON
NORTH FOURTH AVENUE WITHIN
AMENITY ZONE.
WE HAVE BEEN WORKING WITH THE
DDA TO PROVIDE A STREETSCAPE
THAT'S CONSISTENT WITH WHAT'S
BEING CONSTRUCTED AS PART
OF THE DUNBAR TOWER PROJECT.
SO SOME OF THE IMPROVEMENTS
THAT YOU'LL SEE ALONG THIS
FRONTAGE INCLUDE NEW GLOBES ON
THE STREET LIGHTS, NEW STREET
TREE PLANNERS.
>> THE SIDEWALK IS BEING
WIDENED CURRENTLY IT'S ABOUT
FIVE FEET AND IT'S BEING
WIDENED TO EIGHT FEET AND THEN
THERE'LL BE NEW BRICK PAVERS
WITHIN THAT AMENITY ZONE ALONG
FORTH AS FAR AS ALLEYWAYS
COLLECTION GOES, IT WILL BE
COLLECTED AND STORED IN AN
INTERNAL TRASH ROOM AND THEN
DUMPSTERS WILL BE WHEELED OUT
BY THE BUILDING MAINTENANCE
STAFF TO A STAGING AREA THAT'S
ALONG THE PUBLIC ALLEY FOR
COLLECTION AS FAR AS THE
UTILITIES THERE IS AN EXISTING
SIX INCH WATER MAIN IN NORTH
FOURTH AVENUE WHICH IS NOT
LARGE ENOUGH TO SERVICE A
MULTIFAMILY BUILDING.
SO WE ARE PROPOSING A NEW 12
INCH WATER MAIN TO BE
CONSTRUCTED WITHIN THE RIGHT
OF WAYS THAT WOULD EXTEND FROM
KATHERINE AND THEN IT WOULD
REDUCE BACK DOWN TO A SIX INCH
JUST NORTH OF OUR SITE AND THEN
RECONNECT TO THAT EXISTING MAIN
AND THEN THE PORTION OF THE SIX
INCH WOULD BE ABANDONED.
THERE WILL BE NEW DOMESTIC AND
FIRE SUPPRESSION SERVICE NEEDS
AT THE SOUTHEAST CORNER OF THE
BUILDING.
AS I MENTIONED, THERE'S A NEW
HYDRANT, THE NEW SANITARY SEWER
AT THE NORTHEAST CORNER OF THE
BUILDING WHICH WOULD CONNECT TO
AN EIGHT INCH MAIN THAT'S
EXISTING AND FOURTH AVENUE IN
THE ALLEY.
THERE ARE CURRENTLY EXISTING
UTILITY POLES AND OVERHEAD
UTILITY LINES THAT RUN THE
LENGTH THAT ALI DTT LINES AND
AT&T LINES AS PART OF THE
DUNBAR TOWER PROJECT TO THE
SOUTH.
THE UTILITY COMPANIES RELOCATED
THOSE OVERHEAD LINES TO BE
UNDERGROUND EXTEND FROM
KATHERINE UP UNTIL THE
SOUTHWEST CORNER OF OUR SITE.
SO WE'RE WORKING WITH DTT AND
AT&T TO RELOCATE THE OVERHEAD
LINES UNDERGROUND IN THE ALLEY
FROM THAT CORNER UNTIL A POINT
NORTH OF OUR SITE WHERE IT
WOULD RECONNECT TO PULL THAT'S
FARTHER UP THERE AND THEN
CONTINUE ON OVERHEAD
IN
CONJUNCTION WITH THIS PROJECT
AS FAR AS STORMWATER
MANAGEMENT, THERE'S NO EXISTING
WATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEM ON THE
SITE.
WE DID DO INFILTRATION TESTING
.
THE SOILS ARE ALL CLAY SO NOT
GOOD FOR INFILTRATION
UNFORTUNATELY.
WE ARE PROPOSING AN UNDERGROUND
DETENTION SYSTEM THAT'S BENEATH
THE BUILDINGS SO IT WOULD BE
BENEATH THE LOWER LEVEL PARKING
AND THEN THAT SYSTEM WOULD
OUTLET TO THE EXISTING 12 INCH
STORM SEWER THAT'S IN THE
PUBLIC ALI.
AND THEN AT THIS POINT I'LL
TURN IT OVER TO LURGAN AND HE
CAN TALK ABOUT THE BUILDING AND
THE SUSTAINABILITY COMPONENTS.
>> THANK YOU.
PLEASURE TO BE HERE.
MY NAME IS LORCAN O'HERLIHY,
ARCHITECT OF THE PROJECT.
I JUST WANTED A QUICK OVERVIEW
.
WE'RE DEEPLY INVOLVED WITH
URBAN CITIES IN TERMS
OF BUILDING APARTMENTS AMONG
OTHERS HOUSING ALWAYS
RECOGNIZING THE SCALE AND
DENSITY AND TRYING TO DEAL WITH
CONTEXT MEANING MANIPULATING
AND MASKING THE BUILDING SO
IT'S REFLECTIVE OF ENVIRONMENT
.
THESE ARE SIX DIFFERENT
PROJECTS IN DETROIT THE TOP
FOUR IS BRUSH PARK AND
AFFORDABLE HOUSING ON THE RIGHT
HAND SIDE AND THEN A CULTURAL
PROJECT ONTO AN EAST VILLAGE IN
DETROIT DEEPLY INVOLVED WITH
WORK IN MICHIGAN.
ADDITIONALLY, WE DO QUITE A BIT
OF WORK THROUGHOUT THE US AND
THESE REPRESENT A NUMBER
OF PROJECTS THAT WE'VE DONE
PRIMARILY IN LOS ANGELES AND
THE CITY OF LOS ANGELES, ALL
OF WHICH ARE A HYBRID BETWEEN
SUPPORTIVE HOUSING AND TOP LEFT
TO MARKET RATE ON THE RIGHT AND
THEN STUDENT HOUSING.
SO THESE ARE A VARIETY MARKET
RATES, STUDENT HOUSING AND
AFFORDABLE HOUSING, ALL
OF WHICH RECOGNIZE THE VALUE
OF DESIGN WHICH WE THINK IS
AWFULLY IMPORTANT FOR CONTEXT
AND WHERE YOU'RE BUILDING IN
THIS PARTICULAR PROJECT AS I
MENTIONED YOU ARE WHAT DRIVES
OUR WORK IS CONTEXT IN TERMS
OF SCALE.
SO THIS IMAGE REPRESENTS THE
OVERALL CONTEXT IN TERMS
OF SIZES OF BUILDINGS NEXT TO
IT AND AROUND AND ADJACENT.
SO WE TRY TO LOOK AT OUR
PROJECT AS BEING RECOGNIZING
THE VALUE OF THAT IN TERMS
OF STREET AND ADJACENT
BUILDINGS.
SO THIS IS THE DRIVING FORCE
OF THIS.
AS YOU CAN SEE WE HAVE A NUMBER
OF LARGER BUILDINGS.
CERTAINLY ONE TO THE LEFT IS
UNDER CONSTRUCTION, WELL UNDER
CONSTRUCTION.
SO YOU CAN SEE THE SCALE OF OUR
BUILDING WITH REGARDS TO THAT
BIG IDEA IS IS THAT IF YOU'RE
GIVEN THIS BUILDING ENVELOPE TO
MANIPULATE THAT BUILDING NOVEL
TO BRING LIGHT VERY IMPORTANT
ALSO PUSHING BACK TO SHOW
OPPORTUNITIES FOR OUTDOOR
SPACES AND TERRACES WHICH IS
VERY IMPORTANT AS WELL IN TERMS
OF MANIPULATING THE MASKING THE
BUILDING SO IT HAS BREATHING
SPACE ALSO BRINGING LIGHT FROM
THREE SIDES SO EACH THE UNITS
WILL HAVE LIGHT FROM MULTIPLE
SIZES WHICH IS A REALLY GOOD
PASSIVE DESIGN STRATEGY WHEN
YOU HAVE THAT OPPORTUNITY TO
BRING NATURAL LIGHT AND AIR AND
CIRCULATION IN BUILDINGS.
AGAIN, SUSTAINABLE STRATEGY IS
VERY IMPORTANT IN ALL OUR
PROJECTS IT HAS TO BE EMBEDDED
IN ALL OF OUR PROJECTS ARE
COLLECTIVELY GOOD ARCHITECTURE
HAS THAT SO WE ARE NEEDLESS TO
SAY EMBRACE THE IDEA OF A COOL
ROOF GEOTHERMAL.
WE'RE LOOKING AT MULTIPLE OTHER
STRATEGIES AS WELL INCLUDING
HIGH EFFICIENCY DOORS AND
WINDOWS AND ALSO DURABLE AND
LOW MAINTENANCE TERMS
OF LANDSCAPING, OTHER MATERIALS
ON THE BUILDING.
ALL THOSE IS A COMPREHENSIVE
PASSIVE DESIGN STRATEGY WHICH
IS WE TAKE WITH ALL OF OUR
PROJECTS.
HOW DO WE LOOK AT THIS BUILDING
AND HOW CAN WE ACTUALLY PUSH IT
FORWARD IN TERMS OF RECOGNIZING
THE IMPORTANCE OF A HEALTHY
BUILDING VIEW AS YOU CAN SEE
HERE FROM ONE SITE AGAIN,
WHAT'S IMPORTANT HERE IS
LOOKING AT THE MACING THE
BUILDING SO THAT HAS THE SCALE
OF RESIDENTIAL AND I THINK
THAT'S ALSO IMPORTANT IN TERMS
OF THESE TYPE OF BUILDINGS AND
ALSO NEEDLESS TO SAY BRINGING
IN LIGHT FROM MULTIPLE SOURCES
MATERIAL ARE INTERESTING.
WE WANT TO WORK WITH TWO
DIFFERENT TYPES OF MATERIALS
BRICK AND METAL AND THAT'S WHAT
WE THINK IS THE RIGHT MIX ON
THIS PROJECT.
SO AGAIN, AS YOU CAN SEE HERE
PULLING BACK, PUSHING BACK,
OPENING UP THE STREET, MAKING
SURE THE SIDEWALK HAS BREATHING
SPACE AND THOSE ALL PLAY A BIG
ROLE IN THE DESIGN.
HERE'S THE MORE ZOOM IN AREA.
I'M LOOKING AT THE TWO
MATERIALS SO WE ARE RECOGNIZING
DETAILING IS ALL IMPORTANT SO
WE'LL MAKE SURE AS THESE
MATERIALS MEET EACH OTHER
THAT'S RESOLVED WELL AND THAT'S
ALSO PLAYS A BIG ROLE
OF BUILDING TO MAKE SURE WE
BUILD A GOOD PROJECT AND THAT'S
OUR COMMITMENT TO THIS PROJECT.
VERY, VERY INTERESTING MATERIAL
WE'RE CHOOSING TO MOVE FORWARD
WITH THIS SEVERAL PLANS YOU CAN
SEE PARKING BELOW OF NEEDLESS
TO SAY ON THE FIRST LEVEL WE
HAVE TOWNHOUSES AND UNITS THAT
ARE FRONTIN FORTH AND BEHIND
THAT WE HAVE PARKING AMONG
OTHER THINGS WE HAVE BIKE
PARKING WAS MENTIONED EARLIER
AS WELL.
SO THESE ARE ALL PART OF THE
COMPREHENSIVE APPROACH TO THE
PROGRAMING ON THE PROJECT AND
AS WE GO VERTICAL, AS YOU SEE
BOTH SIDES ARE EQUALLY AS
IMPORTANT.
IT'S NOT JUST FRONTIN ONE SO
VERY IMPORTANT THAT YOU CAN
CONTINUE YOU CAN GO BACK TO
YOUR SLIDE AT SHOULDER LEVEL
FIVE.
>> SO HERE AS YOU CAN SEE THAT
THE TYPICAL PLAN IS WE WANT
THESE UNITS TO HAVE LIGHT AND
AIR AND FOR ALL THE UNITS WHICH
IS EXTREMELY IMPORTANT AS YOU
CAN SEE ON THE ROOF THAT'S
WHERE THE SOLAR WILL BE.
SO ALL THESE ARE COMPREHENSIVE
APPROACH TRYING TO CREATE A
GOOD BUILDING AND DESIGN IS AN
IMPORTANT ELEMENT TO THIS TO TO
BRING FORWARD FOR THIS
BUILDING.
AND I WANT TO THANK YOU LIKE
YOU WILL NOW HEAR FROM PATCHER
WHO WILL GIVE STAFF REPORT.
>> THANK YOU.
I HAVE VERY LITTLE TO ADD TO
THAT.
I JUST WANT TO POINT OUT THAT
IT'S IN THE D2 ZONING DISTRICT
AND ALSO THE CARRINGTON
CHARACTER OVERLAY DISTRICT, THE
SECONDARY STREET FRONTAGE AND
AT THE SITE PLAN IS UTILIZING
THE SUSTAINABILITY COMPONENT
EXCEPTION TO HEIGHT LIMITS FOR
UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT CODE .
THAT MEANS THAT THEY THEY THEY
MET THE REQUIREMENTS FOR
SUSTAINABILITY TO GIVE THEM AN
EXTRA 18 FEET OF BUILDING
HEIGHT IN THIS CASE THE
DEVELOPER HAS AGREED TO THE
VOLUNTARY PART CONTRIBUTION AND
STAFF DOES RECOMMEND THE SITE
PLAN BE APPROVED BECAUSE IT
MEETS THE KIND OF THE
CONTEMPLATED DEVELOPMENT
COMPLIES WITH APPLICABLE STATE,
LOCAL AND FEDERAL LAWS
ORDINANCES STANDARDS AND
REGULATIONS FOR ME.
THANK YOU PLAN MANAGER KELLY.
>> I WOULD AS SO MAY KNOW IS
THAT HERE IS OUR LIAISON TO THE
HISTORIC DISTRICT COMMISSION
AND MANAGES OUR HISTORIC
PRESERVATION.
I WOULD LIKE TO REQUEST THAT
SHE SHARE THE HISTORY OF THE
SITE THAT WAS INCLUDED IN THE
SITE ON GIVEN THE LOCAL
SIGNIFICANCE OF COURSE.
THANK YOU.
AND THEN I'M GOING TO ADD ON
ONE OTHER THING TOO.
WE'RE GOING DOWN THAT ROAD THE
SEVEN BUILDINGS AT THREE
THIRTEEN TO THREE TWENTY SEVEN
BRONKHORST WERE BUILT BETWEEN
1914 AND 1918 AS A SINGLE
FAMILY THEY MAY HAVE BEEN NAMED
AFTER SAMUEL BRONN WHO LIVED IN
ONE OF THE HOUSES, THE ONE
THAT'S NOT THERE ANYMORE.
IT WAS THE EIGHTH HOUSE ON THE
COURT.
THEY WERE NEARLY IDENTICAL.
GABAL FOR HUNTERS WITH CABLED
WALDO EMERSON COVERED FRONT
PORCHES OUR STUCCO CLAD
ORIGINALLY WITH MATCHING STUCCO
FRONT PORCHES AND TRIPLE
WINDOWS ON THE SECOND FLOOR THE
THE STREET AS YOU SEE IT TODAY
WAS CLOSED TO VEHICLES IN
NINETEEN SEVENTY FOUR.
I'M GOING TO YOU FINISH.
THANK YOU.
SUFFICE IT TO SAY I DID NOT
LIKE WORKING ON THE SITE PLAN.
THE HOUSES WERE SLATED FOR
DEMOLITION IN THE EARLY 1980S.
WHEN I SAY RANCOURT CAMPAIGN
WAS UNDERTAKEN BY CITIZENS THE
BUILDINGS WERE REMODELED
SHORTLY AFTER WAY SECOND FOR
CONNECTIONS AND RAMP'S BETWEEN
AND BUILDINGS TO ACCOMMODATE
RESTAURANTS, BARS, SHOPS AND
COURT AND OFFICE SPACE IN THE
COURTYARD WAS INSTALLED IN 1984
FROM THE MID 1990S TO TWENTY
TWENTY.
BROKAW WAS THE CENTER OF THE
LGBTQ COMMUNITY IN AN ARBOR
HOME TO THE GYM TO A COMMUNITY
CENTER.
OUR COMMON LANGUAGE BOOKSTORE
IN TWENTY FIFTEEN THE LOCAL
OWNERS AND THE SUPREME COURT
DECISION THAT STATES ARE
REQUIRED TO RECOGNIZE MARRIAGES
BETWEEN SAME SEX COUPLES WAS
CELEBRATED IN FRONT COURT AND
ATTRACTED NATIONAL MEDIA
ATTENTION.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
OK WILL NOW TAKE A MOMENT TO
HAVE A PUBLIC HEARING FOR THE
SITE PLAN THIS IS AN
OPPORTUNITY FOR INDIVIDUALS TO
SPEAK UP TO THREE MINUTES ON
THIS ITEM WILL FIRST HEAR FROM
THOSE THAT ARE PRESENT AT THE
CHAMBER THEN WE WILL HEAR FROM
REMOTE PARTICIPANTS TO SPEAK
REMOTELY PRESS STAR NINE ON A
FOREIGN PHONE OR USE THE RIGHT
HAND FEATURE IF ON ZOOM FOR
PHONE ACCESS CALL EIGHT SEVEN
SEVEN EIGHT FIVE THREE FIVE TO
FOUR SEVEN AND INTER MEETING
NINE SEVEN SEVEN SIX SIX THREE
FOUR ONE TWO TWO SIX.
>> CITY STAFF IDENTIFY CALLERS
BY THE LAST THREE DIGITS THEIR
PHONE NUMBER OR BY NAME FOR
ZOOME USERS YOU WILL HEAR AN
ANNOUNCEMENT WHEN IT'S YOUR
TURN TO SPEAK PLEASE ENSURE
YOU'RE QUIET AND MUTE ANY
BACKGROUND NOISE FOR ALL
PARTICIPANT PLEASE STATE YOUR
NAME AND ADDRESS AT THE
BEGINNING OF YOUR COMMENTS.
IS THERE ANYONE PRESENT WHO
WOULD LIKE TO SPEAK THIS PUBLIC
HEARING?
HI I'M RANSBURG FIFTY THREE
CAMBRIDGE ROAD.
I SHARE MRS THATCHER'S EMOTIONS
ON THE LOSS OF BROWN COURT.
I THINK IT'S PROBABLY PLAYED A
SPECIAL PART HISTORICALLY FOR
ITS LGB KUTTY REASONS AND ALSO
BECAUSE IT REPRESENTED AN ERA
IN ANN ARBOR A KIND OF A STYLE
OF THAT COTTAGE COURT THAT WAS
VERY SPECIAL TO THAT AREA.
I THINK THAT THESE ARE THE
LITTLE GEMS IN ANN ARBOR THAT
WE ARE GOING TO LOSE AND I
THINK THAT IN LOSING THIS KIND
OF FABRIC WE LOSE A LITTLE BIT
OF THE SOUL.
BANABA I'M SO SORRY TO SEE IT
GO.
I UNDERSTAND GROWTH BUT I THINK
ONE OF THE THINGS ABOUT
HISTORIC DISTRICTS AND HISTORIC
AREAS IS NOT THAT THEY WERE
EXCLUSIONARY BUT THAT WE WERE
RECOGNIZING SOMETHING IMPORTANT
ABOUT HOW IT PLAYED A PART IN
THE HISTORY OF AN ARBOR.
AND AS WE LOSE THESE LITTLE
INCREMENTAL THINGS WE LOSE A
PART OF THE BIGGER PICTURE.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
MY NAME IS BRUCE MOORE AND I
SERVE AS THE PRESIDENT OF THE
HOMEOWNERS ASSOCIATION AT 414
NORTH MAIN STREET, A SIXTEEN
UNIT CONDOMINIUM COMMUNITY
CONSTRUCT IN TWENTY FIFTEEN
HOURS IS THE FIRST MAJOR
RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT IN THE
KOREATOWN NEIGHBORHOOD I SPEAK
TO BOTH AS AN INDIVIDUAL
HOMEOWNER AND ON BEHALF OF OUR
ENTIRE ASSOCIATION.
WE STRONGLY BELIEVE THAT THE
CURRENT PLAN IS NOT IN THE BEST
INTEREST OF THE NEIGHBORHOOD OR
ITS RESIDENTS WHILE OTHER
MEMBERS OF OUR COMMUNITY MAY
ADDRESS ADDITIONAL ISSUES, I'D
LIKE TO FOCUS ON THREE KEY
CONCERNS REGARDING THE PROPOSED
BRONKHORST DEVELOPMENT PROJECT
THAT FIRST CONCERNS TRAFFIC
SAFETY AND CONGESTION EVEN
BEFORE THE DUNBAR PROJECT
BEGAN, THE ALLEY BEHIND OUR
HOMES WAS ALREADY A SERIOUS
TRAFFIC HAZARD WITH A COUPLE
OF CAR COLLISIONS AND NUMEROUS
NEAR MISSES BETWEEN CARS AND
MORE ALARMINGLY BETWEEN CARS
AND PEDESTRIAN.
THE ADDITION OF 60 THREE UNITS
AT THE DUNBAR TOWERS THAT
COMBINED WITH THE PROPOSED WAS
THIRTY SIX THIRTY SEVEN THIRTY
EIGHT.
I'VE HEARD DIFFERENT NUMBERS AT
BRONKHORST WILL SIGNIFICANTLY
INCREASE TRAFFIC MAKING THE
MORE DANGEROUS ALREADY IS AND
PUSHING THIS SAFETY ISSUE
BEYOND MANAGEABLE LIMITS THE
SPEED DESPITE REPEATED
COMMUNITY REQUESTS, THE CITY
HAS DONE NOTHING TO ADDRESS THE
CURRENT DANGER AND WE ARE
FEARFUL THE PATTERN WILL
CONTINUE SO WE ASK WILL THE
CITY INSTALL STOP SIGNS,
DIRECTIONAL SIGNS AND SPEED
BUMPS AT THE BLIND PEDESTRIAN
AND AUTO CROSSINGS WHETHER IT
BE TRAFFIC FOR ENFORCEMENT TO
PREVENT INCREASED WRONG WAY
DRIVING AND KINGSLEE AND IN THE
ALLEY WILL THE SURFACE BE WELL
MAINTAINED AND CLEAN PAVEMENT
AND SNOW REMOVAL TO HANDLE THE
HIGHER USE?
THE BRONKHORST PROPOSAL
INCLUDES THIRTY THREE PARKING
BASES.
THAT'S SIMPLY NOT REALISTIC.
WHILE MANY RESIDENTS MAKE
SOMETIMES WALK, BIKE OR USE
PUBLIC TRANSIT, MOST WILL STILL
OWN CARS FOR GROCERY SHOPPING
APPOINTMENTS AND TRAVEL.
THE ALREADY VERY LIMITED STREET
PARKING WILL BE FURTHER
STRETCHED FOR CURRENT
HOMEOWNERS, RENTERS, NEW
TENANTS AND CARRY ON SHOPPERS
ESPECIALLY ON FARMERS MARKET
DAYS.
MY SECOND POINT REGARDS HEIGHT
AND SCALE OF DEVELOPMENT JUST A
FEW YEARS GO OF A FIVE STORY
THERE WAS A CLEAR FIVE STOREY
HEIGHT LIMIT.
THE SIX HOUR PROJECT ON MAIN
STREET WAS REJECTED TO THESE
HEIGHTS.
NOW WE NOT ONLY IMPROVE THE
IMMENSE SIX STORY DONE OUR
PROJECT BUT WE'RE CONSIDERING A
SEVEN STORY PROJECT.
THIS MARKS A CONCERNING TREND
WHAT WE MIGHT CALL BUILDING
HEIGHT CREEP.
THE PROPOSED PROJECT DWARFS
SURROUNDING STRUCTURES AND
INTERESTS INTRODUCE ZERO
GREENSPACE THE HISTORIC
DISTRICT TOWN IS FAMOUS FOR ITS
CHARM AND UNIQUE SENSE
OF COMMUNITY.
IF WE CONTINUE TO ALLOW THESE
EXCEPTIONS BECOME THE RULE, THE
CAPITAL NEIGHBORHOOD WILL BE
TURNED INTO WALL-TO-WALL HIGH
RISE BUILDINGS AND BECOME
UNRECOGNIZABLE.
LET'S REMEMBER ANN ARBOR HAS
ALWAYS BEEN KNOWN AS TREE TOWN
INCLOSING WAS BUILT.
IT'S TOO TOUGH FOR NEIGHBORHOOD
LACKS SUFFICIENT PARKENING
ACCESS EXACERBATES CURRENT
TRAFFIC AND PARKING ISSUES AND
PRESENTS MULTIPLE SERIOUS
SAFETY RISKS FOR CURRENT TOWN
COMMUNITY RESIDENTS.
THANK YOU.
HI.
>> HI.
MY NAME IS BEV SIEFERT AND I AM
THE VICE PRESIDENT OF THE 414
NORTH MAINE CONDOMINIUM
ASSOCIATION.
BRUCE HAD A THIRD PIECE THAT
I'LL READ NOW BECAUSE HE DIDN'T
HAVE TIME TO READ IT AND THAT
WAS THIS IS THE DUNBAR PROJECT
SO FAR HAS BEEN A TREMENDOUS
CONSTRUCTION DISRUPTION AND HAS
REALLY IMPACTED US AS RESIDENTS
.
THE NOISE BEGINS WELL BEFORE
SEVEN O'CLOCK EVEN THOUGH IT'S
SUPPOSED TO NOT START UNTIL
SEVEN O'CLOCK.
WE'RE VERY, VERY CONCERNED
ABOUT THE ALLEY AND THE TWO WAY
TRAFFIC THAT WILL BE TAKING
PLACE NOW FOR SEVERAL YEARS
DURING CONSTRUCTION AS IT IS
THE ALLEY IS WAY TOO SMALL.
IT'S NOT STREET, IT'S AN ALLEY
AND IT HAS GARBAGE PAILS.
IT HAS DUMP TRUCKS AND ALL THE
THINGS THAT WOULD BE GOING IN
THERE AND THE AMOUNT OF TRAFFIC
THAT WOULD BE GOING BACK AND
FORTH WITH THE TWO WAY TRAFFIC
WOULD JUST BE CRAZY.
ALSO THE VEHICLES THE
CONSTRUCTION VEHICLES THAT HAVE
BEEN PARKED IN THE ALLEY HAVE
KEPT US AS RESIDENTS FROM
GETTING OUT OF OUR GARAGE OR
GETTING INTO OUR GARAGE AND THE
CONSTRUCTION PEOPLE HAVE BEEN
LESS THAN PLEASANT ABOUT MOVING
THEIR STUFF AND BASICALLY THE
DISRUPTION WE ARE WE ARE NOT
AGAINST DEVELOPMENT THAT'S NOT
THE CASE BUT IT NEEDS TO BE
DONE SENSIBLY AND I'M CARING
FOR THE PEOPLE WHO ALREADY LIVE
THERE AND I ALSO SUPPORT MISS
THATCHERS SENSE OF COMMUNITY
AND WHAT KEARY TOWN DISTRICT
TOWN MEANS TO OUR COMMUNITY
MEMBERS TO THE TOWN WE ARE
SUPPOSED TO BE KNOWN AS TREE
TOWN AND WE ARE AFRAID THAT WE
WILL EVENTUALLY BE KNOWN AS OUR
TOWN, SOMETHING WE REALLY WOULD
NOT LIKE TO SEE.
THANK YOU
.
GOOD EVENING.
GOOD EVENING AND THANK YOU FOR
YOUR SERVICE.
THE PROFESSIONAL STAFF, THE
ELECTIVES, THE APPOINTED
THERE'S SOME REAL ROCK STARS
HERE AND I REALLY APPRECIATE
IT.
ALL RIGHT.
I WILL NOT REPEAT WHAT I WAS
GOING TO REPEAT WHICH HAS BEEN
WELL COVERED ABOUT THE
CONGESTION AND EXCEPT FOR ONE
POINT ON CONGESTION AND I'M
GOING TO COME UP WITH A NEW
IDEA HAVING LISTENED TO THIS
NEW TO ME I WAS GOING TO POINT
OUT AND DO POINT OUT THAT TEN
YEARS AGO THE BUILDING THAT I'M
PRIVILEGED TO LIVE IN IT FOR
FOURTEEN NORTH MAIN STREET
I
DON'T THINK I GAVE HIM MY NAME.
>> I SKIPPED THAT PART.
ATLANTA PUBLIC I'M SORRY.
AND FOR 414 OR THREE THANK YOU.
PARDON ME.
AND I GOT SO CARRIED AWAY WITH
MY NEW IDEA AND I'M THINKING
OF THE HISTORY THAT IS BEING
CRUSHED BECAUSE HISTORY IS
HISTORY AND UNLESS IT'S DENIED
WHICH HAPPENS MORE AND MORE
THESE DAYS IT'S WITH US.
BUT THE PROBLEM I WAS GOING TO
POINT OUT AND HAS BEEN POINTED
OUT THERE'S NO SET BACK AND
THESE NEW BUILDINGS, THE
FLATIRON BUILDING WHICH HAS
GONE UP TO FIVE STORIES THEY
DIDN'T LEAVE ROOM FOR A BENCH
NOT A POCKET PARK BUT EVEN A
BENCH AND THE SEVEN STORIES
THAT IT'S BEING REWARDED FOR
EFFICIENCY IMPORTANT THEY'RE
GOING TO MAKE MONEY BACK ON
THAT THERE NEED TO BE REWARDED
WITH EXTRA THAT SHOULD BE
NORMALIZED THE KIND
OF WONDERFUL ENERGY THAT YOU'RE
PUTTING INTO IT SHOULD BE
NORMALIZED FOR EVERY LARGE
BUILDING NOT REWARDED WITH
EIGHTEEN MORE FEET THAT YOU'RE
GETTING THE LIGHT BECAUSE
YOU'VE DESIGNED YOU'RE A GOOD
ARCHITECT AND YOU'VE DESIGNED
IT THAT WAY.
WE'RE LOSING THE LIGHT AND AND
I DON'T JUST MEAN WE I MEAN THE
PEOPLE WHO COME TO FARMER'S
MARKET I MEAN THE THOUSANDS
OF PEOPLE WHO USE THAT AS
PEDESTRIAN THIS COMMUNITY SPACE
WHY NOT FIRST OF ALL LIMIT THE
BUILDINGS IN THAT AREA EXCEPT
FOR DUNBAR WHICH WE APPRECIATE
DESERVES THE EXTRA HEIGHT
BECAUSE OF WHAT IT IS DOING FOR
THE COMMUNITY.
THIS IS BUILDING THEY'RE GOING
TO BE MILLION PLUS THERE'S
NOTHING GOING TO BE A MILLION
DOLLARS.
THERE MAY BE SOMETHING REALLY
SMALL I DON'T KNOW.
THIS IS NOT FOR YOUR AFFORDABLE
HOUSING CRISIS IN ANN ARBOR.
>> MAKE IT LOWER AND HAVE A
COURTYARD THAT IS PUBLIC SPACE
THAT RECOGNIZES WHAT WAS THERE
WHAT HAPPENED THERE DOESN'T
HAVE TO BE BIG BUT IT HAS TO BE
REAL AND I THINK YOU COULD
BRING THE THE VALUES OF A CITY
TOGETHER AND THE NEEDS OF THE
CITY TOGETHER.
BUT THEY'RE GOING TO LOSE SOME
SOME SALABLE UNITS.
>> THANK YOU.
I APPRECIATE THAT.
THANK YOU
.
PLANNING COMMISSION ZERO TWENTY
SEVENTEEN FAIR STREET AGAIN.
HARVARD LOVES TO MAKE THE
PERFECT THE ENEMY OF THE GOOD
AND YET SOMEHOW THERE'S THIS
DEVELOPMENT THAT SEEMS TO BE
PRETTY PERFECT.
OFTENTIMES WHEN TALKING ABOUT
THE PLAN THERE'S THESE A NUMBER
OF ISSUES THAT COME UP AND I
THINK THIS DEVELOPMENT MEETS
ALL OF THOSE REQUIREMENTS.
FOR EXAMPLE, EVEN THOUGH WE
HAVE NO PARKING MINIMUMS,
THERE'S STILL THIRTY THREE
INDOOR PARKING SPOTS BEING
PROPOSED THOUGH THE MARKET I
GUESS IS STILL ASKING FOR
PARKING SPOTS EVEN THOUGH THERE
WAS NO EXISTING STORMWATER
SYSTEM ON THE SITE.
THERE'S A SUBTERRANEAN
STORMWATER DETENTION SYSTEM
BEING ADDED TO IMPROVE OUR
STORMWATER.
THE BUILDING IS READY FOR FULL
ELECTRIFICATION AND USE
GEOTHERMAL.
IT'S VERY EXPENSIVE BUT THIS
SITE IS PROPOSING TO DO THAT.
THERE'S A PARKS CONTRIBUTION.
IT'S ALWAYS NICE TO GET MORE
MONEY FOR OUR BEAUTIFUL PARKS.
THERE'S LARGER SETBACKS THAN
WHAT'S REQUIRED BY THE ZONING.
I THINK THE FRONT AND REAR HAVE
LARGER SET BACKS AND A SITE
PLAN INCLUDES WIDER SIDEWALKS
THAN EXISTS.
THEY'RE CURRENTLY SO IN MANY
WAYS IT SEEMS LIKE A WIN I
THINK TO ME THE LOSS IS THAT
THIS PROPERTY IS BEING BUILT UP
TO THE HEIGHT LIMIT OF DENHA
AND USING THE SUSTAINABILITY
BONUS WHICH IMPLIES THAT THERE
IS A DEMAND FOR TALLER
BUILDINGS IT IS RIGHT DOWNTOWN
WE CALL IT KOREATOWN.
I USED TO LIVE THERE.
IT'S A GREAT PART OF TOWN BUT A
LOT OF PEOPLE WANT TO LIVE HERE
AND WE ARE LIMITING
DEVELOPMENT.
WE ARE LIMITING THE NUMBER
OF PEOPLE WHO CAN LIVE HERE.
SO I LOOK FORWARD TO THE ZONING
HOPEFULLY CHANGING SOON AND
ALLOWING MORE DEVELOPMENT.
THE FUTURE.
IT'S AN INCREDIBLE PLACE TO
LIVE AND I HOPE THAT MORE
PEOPLE CAN GET TO LIVE THERE.
ONE OTHER NOTE ABOUT POSTCARDS
IT SEEMED LIKE MORE THAN 10
PERCENT OF THE POSTCARDS THAT
WERE MAILED OUT AND THIS SITE
WERE REJECTED.
I'VE TALKED WITH OUR PLANNING
DEPARTMENT AND IT SOUNDS LIKE
POSTCARDS OFTEN GET REJECTED
AND ALSO THEY DON'T SEEM TO
SERVE AN EFFICIENT PURPOSE
OF GETTING PEOPLE TO COME TO
THOSE MEETINGS SO I'M NOT
SURPRISED THAT WE DIDN'T SEND
THEM OUT FOR THE COMPREHENSIVE
PLAN BECAUSE THEY DON'T SEEM TO
WORK VERY WELL IN GETTING
PEOPLE ENGAGED.
THAT'S ALL.
THANK YOU.
THANK YOU
.
GOOD EVENING.
HONORABLE MEMBERS OF THE
COMMISSION MY NAME IS MONICA
WATERLINES.
I CURRENTLY RESIDE AT 618 SOUTH
MAIN APARTMENT FOR TWENTY SIX
AND I AM IN THE PROCESS
OF PURCHASING A HOME AT FOUR
ONE NORTH FOURTH AVENUE
DIRECTLY ADJACENT TO THE
BRONKHORST DEVELOPMENT AS A
CITIZEN IN A SAME SEX
PARTNERSHIP AND A MEMBER OF THE
LGBTQ COMMUNITY I WANT TO
ACKNOWLEDGE THE PAIN OF LOSING
THIS KIND OF HEART THAT PULLS A
COMMUNITY TOGETHER.
IT IS A SHAME TO LOSE THIS
CHARACTER OF THE CITY AND IT
WOULD BE DESIRABLE TO HONOR IN
SOME WAY.
I'M A NEWCOMER TO YOUR
BEAUTIFUL COMMUNITY.
I'M JUST GETTING TO KNOW THE
CITY OF ANN ARBOR.
I UNDERSTAND WHY MORE PEOPLE
WOULD LIKE TO LIVE IN THE URBAN
CORE OF THE CITY AND THE
NECESSITY FOR HOUSING STOCK TO
SUPPORT THE COMMUNITY.
I ALSO UNDERSTAND THAT I'M
COMING INTO A PROCESS THAT HAS
BEEN UNDERWAY FOR QUITE SOME
TIME AND THIS PLANNING PROCESS
HAS BEEN BEFORE YOU MULTIPLE
TIMES IN THE PAST.
SO I'VE CHOSEN TO SPEAK TONIGHT
SIMPLY TO INTRODUCE MYSELF AS A
NEW NEIGHBOR AND AN INTERESTED
PARTY TO REGISTER MY INTEREST
IN THE PLANNING PROCESS AND THE
IN HOPES THAT I CAN EXPRESS
SOMETHING THAT WILL BE TAKEN
INTO ACCOUNT AS THE SITE
CONTINUES IN DEVELOPMENT.
I WANT TO BRIEFLY POINT TO FIVE
THINGS FIRST THE FOUNDATION
SAFETY AND STRUCTURAL INTEGRITY
OF ALL THE NEARBY STRUCTURES
DURING EXCAVATION AND BUILDING
OF SUCH A LARGE BUILDING.
I UNDERSTAND THAT ACCORDING TO
THE SITE PLAN THE PARKING
GARAGE WOULD BE FOUR FEET OR
LESS FROM THE FOUNDATION OF THE
PLACE WHERE I WILL LIVE OR
HOPEFULLY WILL LIVE.
WE HAVE DISCUSSED THE
OPPORTUNITY TO INSTALL
MONITORING DEVICES FOR MOVEMENT
AND FOR VIBRATION AND THE
SECOND THING I WANTED TO POINT
TO WAS THE POSSIBILITY
OF MONITORING FOR BY VIBRATION
AND ASKING THAT THERE BE SOME
KIND OF STOPWORK PROVISION OR
OTHER KINDS OF THRESHOLDS FOR
EXCESSIVE VIBRATION IF THAT
WERE TO HAPPEN.
I UNDERSTAND THAT'S BEYOND THE
SITE PLANNING PROCESS BUT
PERHAPS SOMETHING YOU CAN PASS
ALONG IN THE NEXT PHASE
OF PLANNING THE FOURTH EXCUSE
ME THE THIRD ASPECT I WANTED TO
MENTION WAS THAT A THERE IS
QUITE NEARBY MECHANICAL
EQUIPMENT ALREADY SITTING ON
NEIGHBORING PROPERTIES AND
WHILE THEY ARE SHOWN ON THE
SITE PLAN I UNDERSTAND IT'S
BEYOND THE SCOPE OF THE SITE
PLAN TO MAKE PLANS FOR WHAT
HAPPENS WHEN THOSE ARE NO
LONGER SET BACK PROPERLY.
AND FINALLY, I WANTED TO JUST
THANK JILL AND THE OTHER
MEMBERS OF THE STAFF WHO HAVE
BEEN VERY RESPONSIVE TO MY
QUESTIONS AS I'VE GOTTEN TO
KNOW YOUR PROCESS.
THANK YOU.
THANK YOU
FOR YOUR CULTURE
ELECTION COMMISSION KEN GARBER
AGAIN I WANT TO RAISE A
TECHNICAL ZONING ISSUE AS
YOU'VE HEARD THIS PROJECT IS
LOCATED IN DAEWON DISTRICT.
IT INTENDS TO EXCEED THE DAEWON
HEIGHT LIMIT BY TAKING
ADVANTAGE OF THE HEIGHT
EXCEPTION IN SECTION FIVE
EIGHTEEN POINT FOUR OF THE UDC
AND THAT SECTION SPECIFIES
SIXTY PERCENT ROOF COVERAGE
WITH SOLAR AND 100 PERCENT
ELECTRIC POWER.
SO WE SAW A DEPICTION
OF GEOTHERMAL ON THE SLIDES
THAT MR. HERLIHY PRESENTED A
QUESTION ABOUT THAT.
>> IS THIS GEOTHERMAL JUST A
POSSIBILITY HERE OR IS IT A
COMMITMENT?
I ASK BECAUSE THE PETITIONER
COMMISSIONED A TWENTY YEAR
TECHNICAL INVESTIGATION BY THE
EPA GROUP CONSULTING COMPANY IN
THAT REPORT THERE IS NO MENTION
OF GEOTHERMAL.
IT'S CONCERNED ENTIRELY WITH
THE UNDERGROUND PARKING AND
WITH FOUNDATION IN SUCH.
SO HOW SOLID IS THIS GEOTHERMAL
CONTENT?
HAS THERE BEEN A GEOTECHNICAL
FEASIBILITY STUDY DONE TO SEE
IF IT'S FEASIBLE AND NO ONE IN
THE PRESENTATIONS BY THE
SPIERER MR. HERLIHY I HEAR THE
WORDS ONE HUNDRED PERCENT
ELECTRIC POWER FOR THE BUILDING
AND IF THERE IS GEOTHERMAL HEAT
THE ENTIRE BUILDING OR WILL
THERE BE SUPPLEMENTARY AIR
SOURCE HEAT PUMPS?
>> ALSO A BIG QUESTION FOR ME
IS THERE GOING TO BE A GAS
CONNECTION THE WAY I READ FIVE
EIGHTEEN POINT FOUR IN THE UDC
IT'S GOT TO BE ONE HUNDRED
PERCENT ELECTRIC POWER.
THAT MEANS NO GAS CONNECTION.
YES.
YOU NEED A BACKUP SYSTEM IN
CASE OF OUTAGES BUT A BATTERY
SYSTEM IS WHAT WOULD BE CALLED
FOR IN THIS CASE AND THAT'S
ALSO WHAT SPECIFIED THE ZERO
PLAN STARTING IN TWENTY TWENTY
TWO ALL NEW
CONSTRUCTION SHALL
HAVE NO GAS CONNECTION AT ALL.
SO THOSE ARE MY MAIN QUESTIONS
ABOUT THE SUSTAINABILITY
FEATURES.
>> AGAIN TO SUM UP IS IT IS
THIS GOING TO BE ONE HUNDRED
PERCENT ELECTRIC POWER BECAUSE
IT COULD TECHNICALLY BE IN
COMPLIANCE WITH FIVE EIGHTEEN
POINT FOUR WITH LESS THAN HALF
A PERCENT IF IT PROVIDES
CONDUIT AND ELECTRIC PANELS FOR
FUTURE ELECTRIFICATION.
BUT AS WE KNOW, DTI HAS
SUFFICIENT CAPACITY FOR
ELECTRIFICATION ON DAY ONE.
SO MY QUESTION AGAIN WILL THIS
BE ONE HUNDRED PERCENT ELECTRIC
ON DAY ONE?
WILL THERE BE A GAS CONNECTION?
IS THE GEOTHERMAL COMMITMENT OR
IS IT JUST A POSSIBILITY ONE
POSSIBILITY AMONG MANY AND
FINALLY I'VE ASKED FOR THIS
BEFORE BUT I WOULD LIKE TO SEE
THE COMMITMENT.
ONE HUNDRED PERCENT OF THAT
COULD BE PUT IN DEVELOPMENT
AGREEMENT.
I KNOW THE ARGUMENT RUNS THAT
IT GOES WITH THE ZONING AND
IT'S NOT NECESSARY.
BUT GIVEN THE AMBIGUITY IN THE
STATUTE, I WOULD AGAIN I WOULD
LIKE TO SEE ANY ECONOMY IN THE
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU, MR. THERE IS ONE
HENDRY'S ONLINE Q&A.
>> WE STILL HAVE ONE PERSON
HERE AND THAT'S OK.
MY NAME IS FRAN RIGHT.
I'M HERE WITH MY POST CARD
WHICH YOU CAME TO MY HOUSE AND
I SAVED IT AND COME TO THE
MEETING HERE.
I'M A PIECE OF HISTORY.
I GREW UP IN THIS TOWN AND MY
MOTHER HAD TWO SETS OF FRIENDS
WHO LIVE IN THE HOUSES ON
BRAUNGART SONAR'S ELEMENTARY
SCHOOL WHICH WE USED TO GO
VISIT THE PEOPLE IN THOSE
HOUSES AND THEY WERE LOVELY
LITTLE PLACES.
I WOULD HATE TO LIVE IN IT NOW
BUT YOU KNOW, DARK WOODWORK
REALLY NICE HAS NEVER BEEN
PAINTED.
IT WAS JUST BURNISHED DARK
WOODWORK LIVING ROOM, KITCHEN
DINING AREA.
I NEVER WENT UPSTAIRS AND
PEOPLE'S HOUSES SO I DIDN'T SEE
THEM AND THE SPACE IN BETWEEN
THE TWO HOUSES I DON'T KNOW
WHERE THE PEOPLE PUT THEIR
CARS.
I HAVE ABSOLUTELY NO IDEA
ESPECIALLY SINCE JOE SAID THERE
WAS ANOTHER HOUSE AT THE END
WHICH WAS PROBABLY TAKEN DOWN
FOR THE PARKING LOT FOR SANDY
SMITH REALTY.
YEAH BUT IT WAS GREAT AN
ABSOLUTELY TERRIFIC
NEIGHBORHOOD AND THEN ON THE
NEW BUILDING IN YOUR PICTURE
HERE, TYPICALLY PEOPLE ARE
STANDING AROUND THE STREET AND
IS THIS A WALL OR IS THAT THE
BRICK STREET AS HUH?
THAT'S IMPORTANT AND THAT'S A
STREET THAT'S THE STREET DOWN
THERE.
OK, AND IS IT REALLY WHITE WITH
GREEN ON THE SIDES THERE?
HE'S NOT GOING TO BE ABLE TO
ANSWER RIGHT.
YOUR QUESTION DOWN I WILL POSE
IT TO THE ARCHITECT DIFFERENT
COLOR HERE BUT IT'S IT JUST
DOESN'T FIT IN WITH ANYTHING
ELSE IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
CAN YOU MANAGE YOUR COLOR THREE
AND THREE AND YOU HAVE THREE
MINUTES BECAUSE THE PLANNING
COMMISSION THANK YOU.
MY NAME IS JOANNE BERRY.
I AM WITH HOWARD HAN THE REAL
TRUTH AND I'M THE REALTOR FOR
THE BUYERS FOR A ONE NORTH
FOURTH AVENUE THE NEIGHBORS
IMMEDIATELY ADJACENT TO THE
PROPOSED BRAWNE COURT BUILDING
.
I'M REPRESENTING MY OWN
OBSERVATIONS.
MY CLIENT IS VERY CAPABLE
OF REPRESENTING HERS.
MY FIRST OBSERVATION IS THE
DRAWINGS PRESENTED DEPICT A
WIDE SPACE BETWEEN THIS
BUILDING AND FOR A ONE
NORTHFORK ODD.
MY CLIENT'S MET WITH THE
DEVELOPER, THE ARCHITECT AND IT
WAS INDICATED THAT THE BUILDING
WILL GO RIGHT UP TO THE LOFT
LINE WHICH WOULD LEAVE MAYBE 40
INCHES FORTY EIGHT INCHES
BETWEEN THE BUILDINGS AND WOULD
BLOCK THE WINDOWS FOR A ONE
NORTH FOURTH.
>> I BELIEVE THE SCALE OF THIS
PROJECT MUST RESPECT THE
NEIGHBORS WHO ARE CURRENTLY
THERE AND NOT COMPLETELY
DEPLETE THEIR LIGHT.
>> ALSO THE DEVELOPER REQUESTED
PERMISSION TO BUILD UNDER THEIR
PROPERTY AT FOUR ONE NORTH
FOURTH BECAUSE APPARENTLY THE
BROADCAST PROPERTY IS NOT LARGE
ENOUGH TO ACCOMMODATE THE SCALE
OF THIS BUILDING.
THEY WERE ALSO TALKING ABOUT
DIGGING RIGHT UP TO THE
FOUNDATION FOR ONE NORTH FOURTH
CURRENTLY THE BUILDING OF THE
DUNBAR BUILDING HAS ACTUALLY
CRACKED DECIDING ON FOR A ONE
NORTH FOURTH AND SEVERAL AREAS
.
>> I JUST THINK THAT WE HAVE TO
BE VERY CAREFUL WITH WHAT IS
DRAWN HERE AND WHAT IS ACTUALLY
BEING PLANNED AND RESPECT ALL
THE NEIGHBORS AND POSSIBLY
SCALED BACK THIS BUILDING TO
LIVE WITHIN ITS MEANS.
>> THAT'S ALL.
THANK YOU
.
OUR NEXT CALLER IS RICH ON YOU
PERMISSION TO ADDRESS THE
PLANNING COMMISSION.
GOOD EVENING.
CAN YOU HEAR ME?
>> YES WE CAN.
GREAT.
OK.
MY NAME IS RICH.
FINE.
I'M AT 620 D'WAYNE COURT.
I'M HERE REPRESENTING THE ANN
ARBOR CHAPTER OF THE CITIZENS
CLIMATE LOBBY.
WE CERTAINLY APPRECIATE THE
SUSTAINABILITY ASPECTS OF THE
BUILDING DESIGN BUT IN
CONCURRENCE WITH MR. GARBER WE
ARE REQUESTING CLARIFICATION
REGARDING WHETHER THE BUILDING
WILL BE ALL ELECTRIC AND
IDEALLY ALL GEOTHERMAL.
SOME OF THE LANGUAGE IN THE
SUSTAINABILITY STATEMENTS.
THE STAFF REPORTER A LITTLE
VAGUE SO WE WERE HOPING TO GET
CLARIFICATION.
WE SAW THE DTA PROVIDED A
LETTER OF SERVICE CONFIRMING
THAT THEY HAVE THE CAPACITY FOR
THE BUILDING TO BE ELECTRIC.
THE STAFF REPORT MENTIONS
THOUGH THAT QUOTE THE
ELECTRICAL PANELS HAVE CAPACITY
TO SOLID POWER THE SITE BY
ELECTRICITY UNQUOTE.
BUT THAT DOESN'T MEAN THAT THE
HEATING SYSTEM WILL BE POWERED
BY ELECTRICITY.
THE STATEMENTS REGARDING
GEOTHERMAL DON'T CLARIFY
WHETHER THE BUILDING WILL BE
FULLY GEOTHERMAL AS WELL.
IT'S OUR UNDERSTANDING THAT THE
SUSTAINABILITY COMPONENT IN THE
UDC REQUIRES THAT IN ORDER TO
GET THE HEIGHT EXCEPTION IF DTC
CAN PROVIDE THE CAPACITY THE
BUILDING SHOULD BE ALL ELECTRIC
FROM DAY ONE.
>> SO WE'RE REQUESTING THAT THE
DEVELOPER PLEASE CLARIFY
WHETHER THE BUILDING WILL BE
ELECTRIC.
WE OF COURSE HOPE THAT'S THEIR
PLAN BUT IF IT'S NOT ALL
ELECTRIC WE BELIEVE THAT A
BUILDING DOES NOT MEET THE
CONDITIONS OF THE USE DC
SUSTAINABILITY COMPONENT IN
ORDER TO EARN THE HEIGHT
EXCEPTION.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU
.
ALEX LOWE, YOU HAVE PERMISSION
TO ADDRESS THE PLANNING
COMMISSION AND NOTING THERE'S
ONE MORE CALLER AFTER ALEX LOWE
DIED.
THANK YOU.
I I JUST FIND IT REALLY
INTERESTING HOW PEOPLE ARE
CONCERNED ABOUT OKING IF I WERE
MOVING INTO THAT LOCATION I
WOULD BE SO GLAD TO SELL MY
CAR.
THERE'S A ZIPCAR RIGHT RIGHT
NEXT DOOR JUST ACROSS THE
STREET THERE'S A FARMER'S
MARKET CATTYCORNER THERE'S THE
PEOPLE'S FOOD CO-OP.
I WOULD HAVE EVERYTHING THERE
THAT I NEEDED WITHIN WALKING
DISTANCE SO I'M HONESTLY
SURPRISED THAT THERE'S EVEN ANY
PARKING LOT.
>> I ALSO AM INTERESTED IN THAT
AND PEOPLE TALKING ABOUT THE
THINGS GOING RIGHT UP TO THE
LINE WHICH IS ALLOWED AS FAR AS
I UNDERSTAND AND INDY TOO AND
HAS BEEN FOR FOR YEARS DECADES
.
SO IT'S IT'S IT SEEMS TO SHOW
THAT THAT WHAT PEOPLE WERE
TALKING ABOUT EARLIER WITH
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN ABOUT THINGS
BEING CHANGED FROM OTHER THAT
GOT UNDER THEM DOESN'T REALLY
HOLD UP IF PEOPLE ARE NOW
CONCERNED ABOUT CHANGES THAT
ARE ALREADY LEGAL UNDER UNDER
THEIR ZONING AND HAVE BEEN FOR
FOR FOR AGES THIS DOESN'T SEEM
LIKE THE LIKE THIS THE CITY
SUDDENLY CHANGING ANYTHING.
SO THIS ALL SEEMS QUITE QUITE
WEIRD TO ME THEN ADDED ON TOP
OF THAT RESIDENTS OF A BUILDING
THAT IS ONLY TEN YEARS OLD
COMPLAINING ABOUT CONSTRUCTION
IN A NEXT TO THEM SEEMS LIKE A
IT'S LIKE PULLING THE LADDER UP
BEHIND ONE.
ALL IN ALL I FIND THE OTHER
COMMENTS THAT HAVE BEEN
THOROUGHLY CONFUSING AND I
WOULD REALLY LIKE THEM EXPLAIN
IT A LITTLE BIT MORE.
>> THANK YOU
.
>> THANK YOU.
>> PHONE NUMBER HENNINGHAM FIVE
THREE FOUR.
>> YOU CAN ADDRESS THE PLANNING
QUESTION.
>> HELLO AGAIN.
THIS IS TOM STALBERG CALLING
FROM HOME NOW I WAS AT THE
MEETING EARLIER ONE TWO ZERO
TWO THREE RESTRICT HOW TO LOWER
DOWN ANN ARBOR.
>> THIS BUILDING IS A GOOD
EXAMPLE OF THE RESULT
OF BUILDING WHEN YOU OWN
SOMETHING YOU GIVE IT THE LAND
A SET OF RIGHTS AND WHOEVER
BUYS IT OWNS IT CAN DO CERTAIN
THINGS BY RIGHT IN THIS CASE
THE DEED TO AND WE HAVE AN
OPTION IN OUR ZONING ALLOWS FOR
ADDITIONAL HEIGHT WITH THREE
CONDITIONS AND USING THESE BY
RIGHT SCENARIO.
THIS IS WHAT OUR POLICY IS.
DO THEY LOOK AT THE AREA THIS
IS APPROPRIATE TO AREA YOU
MIGHT COMPARE THAT TO SAY SOME
OF THE STUFF WE'RE LOOKING AT
INCOMPREHENSIBLE AND THE VISION
WHERE WE'RE TAKING THINGS THAT
ARE LOW RISE RESIDENTIAL IN
NATURE BUT THERE'S ONLY
DOWNFORCE AND WE WANT TO MAKE
THEM TRANSITION THEN YOU'RE
GOING TO END UP WITH THIS KIND
OF THING OR HIGHER OR MORE
DENSE WHATEVER IN RESIDENTIAL
AREAS THAT ARE NOT APPROPRIATE
LIKE THIS MIGHT BE APPROPRIATE
IN THE TWO.
>> SO I WANT TO REMIND
EVERYBODY THAT WHEN WE MAKE HIS
OWN DECISIONS ZONING LAW AND
THAT ANYTHING IN THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN ISN'T JUST A
PRELUDE TO BUT A PREREQUISITE
FOR FUTURE ZONING AND THEN THE
ZONING IS GOING TO DICTATE
WHAT'S GOING TO GO THERE.
IT'S NOT AT ALL FEAR MONGERING
TO WORRY ABOUT THE WORST CASE
SCENARIO.
>> IT'S ACTUALLY HOW EVERY
SINGLE PERSON WHO IS WELL
TRAINED IN THIS AREA IS
SUPPOSED TO THINK WHEN YOU
CREATE A ZONING CONDITION IF
ZONING IS WHAT YOU'RE GIVING A
SET OF RIGHTS TO THAT LAND FOR
WHAT IT CAN BE THIS PARTICULAR
PROJECT IS USING WHAT THE
CODE GIVES IT BY RIGHT TO
CREATE THAT I SEE FROM OTHER
COMMENTERS THERE ARE SOME
CONCERNS ABOUT TO VERIFY THAT
THAT'S HAPPENING AND I HOPE
THAT WILL HAPPEN.
BUT I WILL REMIND PEOPLE THAT
SOME PEOPLE MEANT LOSING THIS
COURT.
>> WELL, WE'VE GOT ANOTHER
COURT SOMEWHERE THAT I KNOW
OF THAT ZONED OUT FOR FORESEE
BUT IT'S ALL RESIDENTIAL AROUND
THERE.
>> BUT THEN WE COULD END UP
WITH INAPPROPRIATE DEVELOPMENT
IF WE GIVE IT.
I WRITE THIS TYPE
OF DEVELOPMENT CAPABILITY SO
PLEASE CONSIDER THAT IN YOUR
FUTURE DECISION.
BUT AS FAR AS THIS DECISION
GOES, THE COURTS LOST THIS
BUILDING.
IT'S GOING TO BE HERE OR
SOMETHING VERY SIMILAR TO IT
BECAUSE IT'S EASY TO WITH
OPTIONS AVAILABLE IN DC AND
THAT'S A BIG RIGHT.
>> THANK YOU.
ONE MORE HAND RAISED DURING
THAT PUBLIC COMMENT, MR. VICE
CHAIR LUIS VASQUEZ, YOU HAVE
THREE MINUTES TO ADDRESS THE
PLANNING COMMISSION.
>> YES.
THANK YOU.
LUIS VASQUEZ NINE ZERO NINE
BARTON DRIVE IN UPPER LOWER
TOWN SPEAKING OF ZONING OH MY
GOODNESS.
WOULD YOU BE ABLE TO BUILD
SOMETHING SIMILAR TO WHAT
CURRENTLY EXISTS AT BROWN COURT
IN ANY OF THE SINGLE FAMILY
EXCLUSIONARY SINGLE FAMILY
ZONING WHICH OCCUPIES 70 70
SOMETHING 70 SOMETHING PERCENT
OF ALL THAT ANN ARBOR WOULD YOU
BE ABLE TO REPLICATE THAT TO
LAMENT THE LOSS OF OF BROWN
COURT BUT IMX I DID ABOUT THIS
PROJECT SO I'M CALLING IN
SUPPORT OF OF IT'S GOING TO BE
BUILT THERE.
I ONLY WISH IT COULD BE A
LITTLE TALLER AND I WISH IT
COULD ALSO ACCOMMODATE AND PLAN
FOR AFFORDABLE HOUSING UNITS
WITHIN THAT BUILDING.
SO THANK YOU VERY MUCH AGAIN
FOR YOUR TIME AND HAVE A GREAT
NIGHT.
>> THANK YOU, MR. VSQUEZ.
THERE IN OTHER HANDS RAISED
THIS TIME
SAYING OTHER
COMMENTERS I WILL CLOSE THE
PUBLIC HEARING OR READ THE
MOTION AGAIN.
YOU'LL HAVE TO GIVE ME A
MINUTE.
I HAVE TO LOCATE IT IN MY NOTES
BECAUSE I HAVE MOVE THINGS
AROUND.
I'M JUST GOING TO TRY TO SEE IF
I COULD FIND IT AND THE YEAH
THAT'S YOU THE OF CITY PLANNING
COMMISSIONER PROVES THE THREE
ONE THREE BRONN CORE SITE PLAN
VERSION FOUR DATED APRIL TWO
TWO THOUSAND TWENTY FIVE AND
RECOMMENDS APPROVAL OF THE
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT AS IT
COMPLIES WITH ALL AVAILABLE
REQUIREMENTS OF THE UDC AND
OTHER APPLICABLE LAWS,
ORDINANCES, STANDARDS AND
REGULATIONS AND BASED ON THE
FOLLOWING CONDITIONS ALL
PARCELS MUST BE COMBINED BEFORE
THE ISSUANCE OF ANY BUILDING
PERMITS MOVE BY COMMISSIONER
ABRAMS SECONDED BY COMMISSIONER
MILLS.
>> WE ARE NOW IN DISCUSSION
WHO'D LIKE TO KICK US OFF
COMMISSIONER ABRAMS.
>> HI.
I'LL JUST BEGIN BY SAYING I TO
WILL GRIEVE THE LOSS
OF RANCOURT.
UM BUT I ALSO UNDERSTAND THAT
THIS IS HOW THINGS CHANGE AND I
AM EXCITED TO HAVE A LOOK AT
O'HERLIHY NEW PROJECT IN
DOWNTOWN ANN ARBOR AND I HAVE A
FEW QUESTIONS THOUGH SO I GUESS
THE FIRST QUESTION I HAVE IS
FOR STAFF IF I HEAR CONCERNS
ABOUT THE ACCESS AND I JUST
WANTED TO UM FOR ALL OF OUR OWN
EDUCATION HERE A LITTLE BIT
MORE ABOUT WHAT THINGS REGULATE
TRAFFIC AND GARBAGE CANS AND
JUST FLOW AND THINGS IN AN
ALLEY IF IT'S THE SAME AS THE
STREET OR IF IT'S DIFFERENT
THINGS I'M SURE SO THIS ALLEY
IS MARKED AS A ONE WAY ALLEY ON
THE SITE PLAN AND IT WAS
REVIEWED BY CITY TRAFFIC
ENGINEERS WHO DEEMED IT
OF HAVING SUFFICIENT CAPACITY
SORRY SUFFICIENT CAPACITY TO
ACCOMMODATE THIS NEW UM PARKING
FOR THIS DEVELOPMENT.
YES, TRASH AND RECYCLING WILL
BE SERVICED OFF OF THE ALLEY
NOT OFF OF FOURTH AVENUE AND
YES, ALL THE THINGS THAT YOU
SAID WILL HAPPEN WILL HAPPEN.
BUT THERE'S REVIEW PROCESS.
>> YES.
SIMILAR TO THE WAY WE WOULD
ASSESS TRAFFIC AND ON THE
STREET.
>> EXACTLY.
EXACTLY.
THE TRAFFIC ENGINEERING STAFF
LOOKS AT INGRESS AND EGRESS FOR
VEHICLES.
COURBET'S WHAT IT'S COMING OUT
ON TO WHERE IT'S COMING FROM,
THINGS LIKE THAT.
OK, THANK PICKED IT UP.
UM, I ALSO JUST WANTED TO MAKE
A BRIEF COMMENT ABOUT THE
SETBACKS AND JUST I CAN'T
REMEMBER WHICH ONE OF YOU HAD A
QUESTION ABOUT THE SETBACKS BUT
I JUST WANTED TO SHARE THAT IN
THIS ZONING DESIGNATION THERE'S
ACTUALLY A MAXIMUM SETBACK
OF TEN FEET SO THE DEVELOPER
AND THE ARCHITECT CANNOT SET
THE BUILDING BACK MORE THAN TEN
FEET.
THAT'S HOW THE CODE IS WRITTEN
IN OUR DOWNTOWN EXCUSE ME IN
THE D TO UM AND THAT THE DESIGN
HAS A I THINK AVERAGE SETBACK
OF FOUR POINT SIX FEET.
I WANTED TO INVITE THE
DEVELOPMENT TEAM AND THE
ARCHITECT TO COME TO THE PODIUM
AND MAYBE ADDRESS SOME OF THE
QUESTIONS AROUND THE
SUSTAINABILITY ASPECTS OF THE
PROJECTS.
IT SEEMS LIKE SOMETHING THERE
ARE A LOT OF QUESTIONS AROUND
SO THAT WOULD BE AROUND
GEOTHERMAL ELECTRIFICATION.
>> IS THERE A GAS LINE OR OR A
GAS GENERATOR?
>> UM, SO YOU COULD COME TO
THAT NOW.
THANKS
IF YOU COULD INTRODUCE
YOURSELF.
MY NAME'S MIKE GRAY FOR
DEVELOPMENT.
I'M ON THE DEVELOPMENT TEAM FOR
THE PROJECT.
THANK YOU.
>> HAPPY TO TAKE ANY SPECIFIC
QUESTIONS.
SO I THINK THERE WERE A
QUESTIONS AROUND IS THERE
GEOTHERMAL CAN YOU CONFIRM YES
OR NO IS THE BUILDING GOING TO
BE COMPLETELY ELECTRIFIED OR
SIMPLY CAPABLE
OF ELECTRIFICATION IN THE
FUTURE?
IS THERE A GASLINE FOR A
GENERATOR?
>> IF NOT, WHAT IS THE BACKUP
POWER?
SURE GEOTHERMAL THAT'S
CURRENTLY PLANNED WE ARE IN
DISCUSSIONS WITH THE GEOTHERMAL
PROVIDER.
THEY'RE DESIGNING THE SYSTEM AS
WE SPEAK.
IT IS PLANNED TO BE ALL
ELECTRIC.
THE GEO THERMAL HAS HALF OF ONE
HUNDRED TONS OF COOLING AND
HEATING POWER WHICH WILL BE
AVERAGED I THINK ONE HUNDRED
PERCENT OF THE NECESSARY
CAPACITY WITH A I THINK A 10
PERCENT FOR EXTREME THAT THERE
WILL BE SOME BACKUP ELECTRIC
BOILERS TO HANDLE THAT CAPACITY
.
THERE IS A GAS LINE BUT SOLELY
FOR THE EMERGENCY GENERATOR.
THANK YOU.
MAYBE I'M TO I'LL PASS FOR THE
REST OF MY COMMENT AND LET
SOMEBODY ELSE GET UP IN.
COMMISSIONER ADAMS, I COULD
READ THIS OF COURSE IF I COULD
READ CAPACITY TO SOLAR POWER
OF THE STATE BY ELECTRICITY A
FEW DIFFERENT WAYS.
HOW ARE WE HISTORICALLY
INTERPRETED VIS A VIS THE
QUESTION THAT WE GOT FROM MR.
CARVER ABOUT BACKUP GENERATION
FROM GAS?
I'M SORRY, COULD YOU REPEAT THE
FIRST PART OF THAT?
I WAS I'M HAVING TROUBLE
HEARING ANYBODY SORRY.
I'LL SPEAK LOUDER AND LESS
MUSHMOUTH.
>> THE THE THE
THE BONUS RIGHT
THAT'S BEING TRIGGERED BY THE
SOLAR SOLAR CAPACITY.
SO YES, THE OPERATIVE LANGUAGE
IS CAPACITY TO SOLAR SOLAR
POWER THE SITE BY ELECTRICITY
HAVE WE HISTORICALLY
INTERPRETED THAT IN A WAY THAT
ALLOWS A BACKUP A LINE A GAS
LINE FOR YES.
>> YES FOR EMERGENCY POWER
GENERATION.
YES.
THANKS YEAH.
OTHER COMMISSIONERS
COMMISSIONER LEATHERBY.
SO JUST A COUPLE OF THOUGHTS
I'D LIKE TO REITERATE THAT I'M
SAD TO LOSE OUR AND THE HISTORY
AND THE HOUSES EVEN BEFORE OUT
BARRA WAS THERE BUT CERTAINLY
MANY LOVELY BRUNCH SITTING
UNDER THAT TREE THAT WON'T BE
THERE ANYMORE.
SO I DO HAVE FEELINGS ABOUT
THAT.
BUT I ALSO AM REALLY GLAD THIS
IS PROPOSED TO BE HOUSING AND I
LIKE THE DESIGN AND ITS HOUSING
NEXT TO AFFORDABLE HOUSING
WHICH A LOT OF TIMES PEOPLE
COME AND SAY WELL IF THERE'S
AFFORDABLE HOUSING HERE I WON'T
BE ABLE TO SELL MY HOUSE OR AND
SO I THINK THESE ARE SHOWING
THAT THAT WE CAN ALL EXIST AND
THAT WE ARE A COMMUNITY AND
THAT AFFORDABLE HOUSING AND
MARKET RATE HOUSING CAN EXIST
HAPPILY NEXT TO EACH OTHER.
>> I LIKE THE SUSTAINABILITY
FEATURES.
I LIKE THAT THERE'S RELATIVELY
LOW PARKING.
I DO HAVE SOME I SYMPATHIZE THE
PROBLEMS WITH THE CONSTRUCTION
WHICH CONSTRUCTION IS JUST THE
FIRST PHASE.
THERE'S NOTHING I THINK EVEN
THE BEST THE BEST CONSTRUCTION
IS NOT FUN TO LIVE THROUGH SO I
DON'T KNOW AND MAYBE THIS IS
FOR A STAFF OF LIKE WHAT IS THE
RECOURSE FOR RESIDENTS DURING
CONSTRUCTION IF THERE ARE
PROBLEMS?
ARE THERE MONITORING FOR
VIBRATION?
IS THERE WHAT ARE THE WHAT CAN
NEARBY RESIDENTS DO?
>> I KNOW WE'VE HAD PROJECTS IN
MY NEIGHBORHOOD WHERE LIKE WE
HAD SOMEONE WHO COULD WE TO
PHONE NUMBER WE HAD SOMEONE WHO
COULD CALL IF SOMETHING WAS
HAPPENING WHO WOULD ACTUALLY
ANSWER THE PHONE AND DEAL WITH
THE SITE MANAGERS AND LIKE WHAT
ARE THE WHAT CAN WE WHAT ARE
THE OPTIONS FOR RESIDENTS
NEARBY IF THEY'RE DURING
CONSTRUCTION?
WELL, WHAT YOU JUST MENTIONED
IS POSSIBLY THE BEST POSSIBLE
PLAN AND THAT'S FOR THE
DEVELOPER TO BE IN CONTACT WITH
THE NEIGHBORS AND AND GIVE THEM
A WAY TO REPORT PROBLEMS THAT
THEY'RE HAVING.
I KNOW THAT THERE ARE SEVERAL
IN THIS IMMEDIATE VICINITY THAT
ARE PRETTY CONCERNED ABOUT
WHAT'S WHAT WHAT COULD HAPPEN.
>> BUT PART OF THE PROBLEM IS
THAT WE'RE NOT TO THE BUILDING
PLANS DATE YET WE'RE NOT EVEN
THROUGH CIVIL PLAN REVIEW.
SO IF THIS IF THIS IS APPROVED
IT'S GOT A LONG WAY TO GO
BEFORE I THINK YOU GUYS EVEN
FIGURE OUT HOW YOU'RE GOING TO
BUILD IT, THE DETAILS OF THAT.
BUT YES, STAYING IN TOUCH THE
DEVELOPER WITH THE NEIGHBORS IS
THE BEST THING THAT YOU CAN DO
BECAUSE OTHERWISE ARE GOING TO
CALL ME AND I'M GOING TO HAVE
TO FIND YOU.
>> BUT THEY THEY THEY THEY CAN
CALL ME IF THEY HAVE QUESTIONS
OR ISSUES BECAUSE I WILL I WILL
FIND THE PEOPLE THAT THEY NEED
TO ANSWER THE QUESTIONS.
OK, THANK YOU.
>> I WILL PASS ON TO SOMEONE
WHO COMMISSIONER MILLS AND THEN
COMMISSIONER HAMMERSCHMIDT A
QUICK FOLLOW UP ON CONSTRUCTION
IMPACTS.
>> WHEN I WAS ON MY BIKE ON
FOURTH THE OTHER DAY THERE IS A
VIBRATION MONITOR AND I'M
CURIOUS IT WAS IN THE FLOWERBED
PART OF THE SIDEWALK.
DO WE DO WE KNOW WHAT THAT IS
BECAUSE THAT WAS ONE OF THE
QUESTIONS THAT WAS BROUGHT UP.
>> I DON'T BUT I'M INTERESTED
IN HEARING WHERE IT IS.
>> IT'S RIGHT ACROSS FROM BLOOM
THE THE MEAT WORKS OK?
OK.
YEAH NO NO NO I'M NO IT'S NOT
FOR THIS ONE BUT I'M I'VE NEVER
SEEN SOMETHING LIKE THIS.
IT SAID VIBRATION MONITORING IN
PROGRESS AND SO I DON'T KNOW
WHAT IT'S MONITORING AND I
DON'T KNOW WHO SET IT UP AND
THAT'S WHY I WAS SUPER CURIOUS
FOR WHAT YOU GUYS HAVE GOING ON
THAT SEEMS LIKE NOT MAYBE NOT
SOMETHING THAT'S STANDARD FOR
CONSTRUCTION BUT I DON'T I'M
VERY CURIOUS ABOUT THAT.
>> UM YEAH.
SO FIGURING OUT HOW THAT IS IS
A MACHINE AND IT ACTUALLY HAS A
SOLAR PANEL ON IT TO BE SELF
SUSTAINING THEIR UM THE
QUESTIONS ABOUT THE
SUSTAINABILITY ELEMENTS WERE
ALREADY ASKED AND ANSWERED AND
ALI USE THIS IS THIS THE ZONING
FOR THIS IS EFFECTIVELY BY
RIGHT.
WE'RE HERE BECAUSE CURRENTLY
OUR CODE REQUIRES WHEN THERE'S
A SLIGHT PLAN WHICH IS REQUIRED
OF A LOT OF DEVELOPMENTS BUT
FOR OF A PARTICULAR NUMBER
OF UNITS THAT'S WHY WE HAVE THE
PUBLIC HEARING.
BUT EFFECTIVELY IF IT MEETS THE
STANDARDS THAT ARE LAID OUT IN
OUR CODE , I'M NOT MISTAKEN.
RIGHT.
IT WILL BE A IT SHALL BE
APPROVED EFFECTIVELY THE
LANGUAGE.
>> YES.
YEAH, OK.
I WANTED TO MAKE SURE I GOT
THAT RIGHT BUT ALSO TO JUST LET
PEOPLE KNOW KIND OF WHAT OUR
OPTIONS ARE HERE.
>> SO IF THERE'S SOMETHING THAT
DOESN'T MEET THE REQUIREMENTS,
IF IT DIDN'T THERE ARE NO SET
BACKS.
>> RIGHT.
SO AND ACTUALLY THE SPEC IS A
MAXIMUM.
SO IF THERE WAS SOMETHING THAT
WAS NOT MEETING THAT THEN
HAVING ADDITIONAL COMMENTS ON
THAT OR ASKING THE QUESTIONS
ABOUT ELECTRIFICATION SO THAT
WE ALL ARE AWARE SUPERIMPORTANT
,I JUST WANT TO LET YOU KNOW
KIND OF THE KIND OF DEVELOPMENT
PROJECT THAT THIS IS TO THE
OTHER TO A COMMENT ABOUT THE
SUSTAINABILITY THAT THEY'RE
PROVIDING LIKE WHY DON'T WE
HAVE HAD AN ALL DEVELOPMENTS?
IT WOULD BE AWESOME AND THAT
REQUIRES CHANGE TO STATE LAW
BECAUSE WE CAN'T REQUIRE
THERE'S A UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION
CODE IN MICHIGAN AND WE'RE NOT
ALLOWED TO REQUIRE EXCEEDING
THAT OR REQUIRE ALL
ELECTRIFICATION.
>> SO ACTUALLY HYPPONEN IS ONE
OF THE WAYS THAT WE HAVE
CREATIVELY ENCOURAGED MORE
SUSTAINABILITY AND EVERY YEAR
WE DO SAY THIS IS SOMETHING
THAT WE SHOULD BE ASKING CHANGE
FOR UM WHEN WE HAVE THAT JUST
SO JUST SO THAT YOU'RE AWARE
OF HOW WHY THAT'S THERE AND HOW
IT'S COME TO BE I HAVE A I'M
CURIOUS ABOUT THE POSTCARDS TOO
AND HOW COMMON THIS IS.
I WAS SURPRISED WITH THE NUMBER
OF RETURN POSTCARDS ACTUALLY
AND IF WE KNOW WHY IT'S VERY
COMMON JUST AS AN EXAMPLE ONE
OF OUR COLLEAGUES RECEIVED A
POSTCARD THAT CAME BACK TO HER
AT HER DESK HERE AS
UNDELIVERABLE DESPITE THE FACT
THE ADDRESS WAS PERFECT, THE
NAME WAS PERFECT AND SHE WAS
RECEIVING MAIL DURING THAT
DURATION.
SO I CAN'T TELL YOU WHAT
GOBLIN'S AND INTRICACIES HAPPEN
IN THE POSTAL DELIVERY SERVICE
BUT IT IS COMMON FOR US TO GO
BACK.
MANAGER KELLY COMMISSIONER
HAMMERSCHMIDT TELLS A MEMBER
DISH AND COMMISSIONER NORTON I
JUST WANTED TO SPEAK TO SOME
OF THE PUBLIC COMMENTS AND ALSO
THE COMMISSIONER COMMENTS ABOUT
CONSTRUCTION IMPACTS.
I WANTED TO SHARE THAT THIS HAS
BEEN HEAVILY ON THE RADAR STEP
AS THATCHER HAS ASKED THE
DEVELOPMENT TEAM TO BE IN TOUCH
WITH THE CITY'S MARKET MANAGER
STEPHANIE STOFER.
I'M NOT SURE IF I MENTIONED
THIS DURING ANY OTHER RECENT
DEVELOPMENTS BUT WE HAVE HAD
SEVERAL INTERNAL MEETINGS
BETWEEN THE CITY ENGINEERING
BUILDING STAFF, PARKS AND
RECREATION STAFF WHO MANAGE THE
MARKET TO TALK ABOUT THE
INTENSITY OF DEVELOPMENT IN
THIS AREA.
IT IS SOMETHING WE ARE ACUTELY
AWARE OF AND ALSO DOES HAVE
SOME DISRUPTIONS NOT JUST TO
RESIDENTS OF COURSE, BUT ALSO
TO THE VITALITY OF THE MARKET
WHICH WE WANT TO SUPPORT.
SO THROUGH THAT PROCESS WE'VE
MADE SURE THAT IN PARTICULAR
THE MARKET MANAGER MISS DOFOR
HAS ACCESS TO CELL PHONE
NUMBERS FOR OUR RIGHT OF WAY
INSPECTORS, OTHER ENGINEERING
INSPECTORS AND THAT THERE IS
THAT WE ARE MAKING THESE
PROACTIVE CONNECTIONS TO MAKE
SURE THAT AT LEAST THAT GROUP
IN ANY OF THEIR LISTSERVS, ET
CETERA ARE IN CONTACT WITH NEW
DEVELOPMENT THAT'S HAPPENING IN
THE MARKET AND THAT INCLUDES
THOSE PRESENT.
SO IT IS WELL NOT PERFECT.
I WILL SAY THAT WE ARE TRYING
OUR BEST TO COORDINATE
COMMUNICATIONS AROUND THE
STAGING OF THE VARIOUS PROJECTS
AND WE'RE GOING TO CONTINUE TO
GET BETTER AT THAT.
SO BAD ACTORS THE PEOPLE WHO
MIGHT BE BLOCKING DRIVEWAYS OR
STAGING THEIR CONSTRUCTION
INCORRECTLY IF YOU FOR EXAMPLE
FOR THOSE COMMUNITY
ASSOCIATIONS PRESIDENT IF YOU
NEED ACCESS TO CONTACT
INFORMATION FOR CITY INSPECTORS
,PLEASE GET WITH US AND WE CAN
MAKE SURE THAT YOU HAVE THAT
INFORMATION FOR WHO TO CONTACT.
>> THANK YOU, MANAGER KELLY
COMMISSIONER HAMMERSCHMIDT,
THANK YOU.
>> I HAVE A FEW ADDITIONAL
QUESTIONS YOU MENTIONED THERE
FOR ON-STREET PARKING SPACES
THAT WILL BE MAINTAINED FOR
BRONCHUS.
I WAS JUST AH YEAH.
FOR THIS NEW DEVELOPMENT.
WHAT ARE THE INTENTIONS FOR
THOSE SPACES?
>> ARE THEY LIKE PARKING?
ARE THEY ZONES FOR DROP DELIVER
DROP OFFS?
IS THERE ANOTHER PLACE WHERE
THAT WILL HAPPEN?
>> THOSE WILL REMAIN AS DE
OWNED AND MANAGED PUBLIC PUBLIC
PARKING METERS.
>> YEP.
OK, I HAD ANOTHER FOLLOW UP
QUESTION ON THE ALLEY WE HEARD
DURING PUBLIC COMMENT THERE
WILL BE TWO WAY TRAFFIC DURING
CONSTRUCTION.
>> IS THAT ACCURATE?
I THINK THAT'S RELATED TO THE
CURRENT.
SO IF THE MEMBERS OF THE PUBLIC
I UNDERSTAND YOUR PASSION WE
ARE TRYING TO WORK THROUGH YOUR
QUESTIONS.
IT HELPS US IF THE
COMMISSIONERS CAN TALK TO THE
PETITIONERS.
SO MY UNDERSTANDING IS THAT
WITH
THE CONSTRUCTION OF THE
CURRENT DUNBAR TOWER THAT END
OF THE ALLEY IS CLOSED.
SO THERE'S TWO WAY TRAFFIC I
THINK ON THE NORTH PART OF THE
ALLEY.
>> I THINK THAT'S WHAT THAT
REFERENCE TO TWO WAY TRAFFIC IS
TRADITIONALLY IT'S ONE WAY
GOING NORTH SO I GUESS TO STAFF
IS THAT SOMETHING THAT WHEN THE
DUNBAR TOWERS DEVELOPMENT WAS
BEING PERMITTED, ET CETERA,
THEY ARE ALLOWED TO DRIVE TWO
WAYS BUT EVENTUALLY WE'LL
REVERT BACK TO A ONE WAY.
SO I PRESUME SO FROM THAT
EXPERIENCE A LOT OF THOSE
LOGISTICS HAPPEN DURING THE
CIVIL WAR PLAN AND KEEP IN MIND
IT'S A BALANCE LIKE WHEN WE
WERE IN BOTH THE CITY.
IT'S RIGHT OF VOICE IN THAT
REGARD.
IT'S TRYING TO MANAGE A LOT
OF COMPETING COMPETING
INTERESTS.
>> FOR EXAMPLE, BY PROVIDING
SOME LONGER TERM ACCESS TO THE
ALLEY IT MIGHT SHORTEN OR OR
MINIMIZE THE FOOTPRINT OF THE
FOURTH AVENUE, FOR EXAMPLE.
SO I WILL SAY THAT IT'S A
COMMON CHALLENGE.
WE DO OUR BEST TO DO THE
BALANCE BUT AS MANY PEOPLE
TALKED ABOUT WHEN WE PUT
TOGETHER LAND USE REGULATIONS
THAT PROVIDES A REAL URBAN
DEVELOPMENT.
WE DO WANT TO BE FLEXIBLE NOT
ONLY TO MAKE SURE PEOPLE CAN
REALIZE WHAT THE STANDARDS THAT
WE PUT IN PLACE BUT TO MAKE
SURE WE CAN FIND THE RIGHT
BALANCE OF MAINTAINING THE
ACCESS BUT MAKING SURE
PROVIDING SAFETY AND SEPARATION
FROM CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES
FROM GENERAL PUBLIC THAT
CONSTRUCTION AND I THIS I
WOULD JUST ENCOURAGE YOU ALSO
THAT AS WE JUST TALKED ABOUT,
WE PROVIDE REALLY GOOD CONTACT
INFORMATION SO THAT CURRENT
RESIDENTS IF SOMETHING HAPPENS
CAN MAKE YOU AWARE IF THEY HAVE
CONCERNS IN THE STAFF REPORT I
READ AND I WILL QUOTE THE
DESIGN REVIEW BOARD ENCOURAGE
THE ADDITION OF PUBLIC ART
PARTICULARLY SOMETHING WITH AN
ASPECT OF HISTORIC STORYTELLING
WHICH IS CONCEPTUALLY DISCUSSED
BY THE APPLICANT.
>> I THINK WE ALL KNOW THE
HISTORY OF THE SITE IS REALLY
IMPORTANT SO I DON'T KNOW IF
YOU'VE THOUGHT MORE ABOUT WHAT
YOU MIGHT DO.
I REALLY ENCOURAGE YOU TO THINK
ABOUT I DON'T KNOW IF IT'S
PLAQUES OR PHOTOS OR SOMETHING
IN THAT OUTER LOBBY ENTRANCE
THAT WOULD FEEL INVITING FOR
PASTEURIZE TO TAKE A LOOK AT I
THINK RIGHT NOW HISTORY
ESPECIALLY LGBTQ HISTORY JUST
FEELS SO IMPORTANT TO CELEBRATE
.
OBVIOUSLY WE CAN'T MANDATE IT
BUT I WOULD REALLY, REALLY
ENCOURAGE YOU TO THINK
OF SOMETHING THAT HONORS THE
HISTORY OF THE SITE TO
INCORPORATE.
THANK YOU.
THANK YOU, COMMISSIONER.
ALMOST EVERYBODY HAS
COVERED EVERYTHING.
>> THANK YOU.
I'M REALLY HAPPY ABOUT THE
EXPLANATION ABOUT WHY WE CAN'T
GET THIS LEVEL
OF SUSTAINABILITY ANY OTHER WAY
THAN GIVING A HIGH BONUS.
>> I WANT TO UNDERSCORE FOR MY
CONSTITUENTS AT 414 NORTH MAINE
THAT IT IS IMPORTANT THAT YOU
REACH OUT TO KELLY AND GET
CONTACT INFORMATION FOR
BUILDING INSPECTORS IF PEOPLE
ARE BLOCKING YOUR UM YOUR
GARAGES OR WHATEVER THEY'RE
BLOCKING YOUR CARS AND IF
THEY'RE BEING NOT POLITE TO YOU
WHEN YOU ASK THEM TO MOVE, THAT
IS NOT A CORRECT WAY OF DOING
BUSINESS.
AND SO PLEASE GET THAT
INFORMATION FROM MAX KELLY AND
IF YOU HAVE TROUBLE PLEASE
CONTACT ME AND I'LL DO THAT.
YOU EXPRESSED CONCERNS ABOUT
WRONG WAY DRIVING ON KINGSLEE.
>> DID I HEAR THAT?
OK, SO I WILL TALK TO APD ABOUT
THAT AND MAYBE WE NEED TO
CONSIDER MORE FLAGGING OF I
DON'T KNOW WHAT TRAFFIC YOU
KNOW YOU ASKED FOR A STOP SIGN
WITH BLIND CORNERS OR SOMETHING
IT YOU'RE I THINK YOU ARE
EXPRESSING CONCERNS BECAUSE
YOU'RE OBSERVING BEHAVIOR THAT
IS UNSAFE RIGHT NOW AND UNSAFE
FOR PEDESTRIANS.
SO WE AND I UNDERSTAND THAT
THIS IS NOT RELATED TO YOUR
DEVELOPMENT AT ALL.
THIS IS ABOUT CONSTRUCTION.
THAT'S HAPPENING NOW.
AND SO THIS CAME UP AND SO I'M
JUST LETTING THEM KNOW THAT I
HEARD AND WILL HELP.
YOU KNOW, IT IS REALLY A SHAME
THAT SOMETHING LIKE BRIAN
COULDN'T BE RECONSTRUCTED TODAY
AND IT IS I THINK THAT YOU'VE
DONE A VERY CONSCIENTIOUS JOB
IN TRYING TO BRING AN
INTERESTING BUILDING WHICH IS
NOT WHAT WAS THERE BECAUSE EVEN
IF YOU WANTED TO YOU COULDN'T
REPLACE WHAT WAS THERE.
>> SO, UM, I DID YEAH.
I CAN'T I CAN'T SAY THERE'S
NOTHING THAT I CAN ASK YOU TO
CHANGE BUT THANK YOU FOR DOING
WHAT YOU DID DO.
THANK YOU.
COUNCIL MEMBER JOSH
COMMISSIONER YOU HEAR ME?
I'M JUST A REPORT FROM
COMMISSIONER MILLS THIS IS A
SITE PLAN REVIEW IS AN
ENFORCEMENT MECHANISM TO MAKE
SURE THAT A PROJECT PROPONENT
IS DOING EVERYTHING THEY'RE
SUPPOSED TO BE DOING AT THIS
STAGE OF THE GAME.
CORRECT.
WE HAVE NO DISCRETION.
ALL OF THE DISCRETIONARY THINGS
THAT COULD HAPPEN HAVE HAPPENED
THAT TRUE WE HAVE NO DISCRETION
AT THIS POINT THAT WE CAN
INJECT INTO THIS PROCESS.
IS THAT CORRECT?
THAT'S CORRECT.
THANK YOU.
UM, I WANT TO JUST TIE SOME
POINTS TOGETHER.
THIS IS WHY WE HAD A LONG
DISCUSSION A FEW SESSIONS BACK
ABOUT NOT HAVING PUBLIC
HEARINGS IN FRONT OF CITY
PLANNING APPROVALS BECAUSE IT
GIVES THE IMPRESSION THAT WE
HAVE DISCRETION TO MAKE A
DECISION HERE AND WE DON'T
EVERYTHING THAT THE PROJECT
PROPONENT IS PROPOSING IS
COMPLYING WITH THE LAWS THAT
ARE IN PLACE.
WE HAVE TO APPROVE IT SO I JUST
I WANT TO GET THAT ON THE
TABLE.
WE HAVE NO ROOM TO NOW TELL
THEM YOU NEED TO DO SOMETHING
DIFFERENT BECAUSE WE DON'T LIKE
IT.
WE JUST CAN'T DO THAT.
WE'RE IN THAT POSITION NOW.
SO I WANT TO MAKE CLEAR I I'M
SORRY YOU CAN'T HAVE THIS
DIALOG WITH THE COMMISSIONER AT
THIS TIME.
PLEASE CONTINUE YOUR COMMENTS
TO PUBLIC COMMENT.
IT'S A STILTED PUBLIC COMMENT
PROCESS.
>> I ALSO WANTED TO POINT OUT I
SEE IN THE STAFF REPORT THAT I
THINK YOU NOTED THIRTEEN
HUNDRED POSTCARDS WERE SENT OUT
TO FOLKS WITHIN A LARGE NUMBER
OF POSTCARDS.
UM, I SEE IN THE THOUSAND THREE
HUNDRED AND FIFTY POSTCARDS TO
OUR PROPERTIES WITHIN A
THOUSAND FEET OF THE SITE LIST
THAT THE CITY PROVIDED AND THEN
I SAW IN THE REPORT TWENTY SIX
PEOPLE ACTUALLY ATTENDED YOUR
INTEREST, YOUR MEETING SO YOU
INTERACTED DIRECTLY WITH ABOUT
TWENTY SIX FOLKS THAT'S ABOUT
TWO PERCENT OF THE FOLKS WHO
WERE SENT POSTCARDS EVEN IF
THEY SOMEHOW DIDN'T GET QUITE
DELIVERED.
UM IF YOU TAKE THAT NUMBER AND
APPLY IT TO THE TOTAL
POPULATION OF THE CITY NO THAT
WOULD BE ABOUT TWENTY THREE
HUNDRED PEOPLE I'M MAKING A
POINT WITH REGARD TO EARLIER
COMMENTS THAT WERE MADE ABOUT
HOW WE THIS WHOLE PLANNING
PROCESS HAS BEEN TOTALLY FLAWED
AND LEVERAGING YOUR PROCESS A
LITTLE BIT BECAUSE WE DIDN'T
SEND POSTCARDS TO THE WHOLE
CITY.
WE'VE ALREADY RECEIVED MORE
COMMENTS AND HAD MORE IN TOUCH
TOUCH AND COMMENTS FROM WHAT WE
WOULD HAVE GOTTEN HAD WE SENT
POSTCARDS EVERYBODY AND WE GOT
A SIMILAR RESPONSE RATE SO I
WANTED TO GET PUT THAT ON THE
TABLE AS WELL AND I UNDERSTAND
THERE MAY BE FAULTS WITH THE
MAIL DELIVERY SYSTEM AND AND
I'M SORRY FOR THAT.
I'M NOT NOT GOING TO DEFEND THE
POSTAL SERVICE.
I REALLY I WASN'T INVOLVED.
>> I JUST A FAIRLY NEW MEMBER
TO THE PLANNING COMMISSION SO I
WASN'T INVOLVED WITH THE
EARLIER ITERATIONS THIS PROJECT
THERE'S A LITTLE BIT OF HISTORY
BEING LOST THAT'S SAD.
THIS IS A PROJECT THAT FITS IN
THE PLACE THAT IT FITS.
IT'S MORE THAN TWICE AS TALL AS
WHAT WOULD BE ALLOWED IN A LOW
RISE RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
FOR WHAT WE'RE TALKING ABOUT
THROUGH THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
BUT THIS IS A GOOD PLACE FOR
THIS KIND OF DEVELOPMENT.
IT'S DOWNTOWN.
IT'S WHERE THE DENSITY NEEDS TO
GO TO REALLY ENCOURAGE THE
KINDS OF LIVING IN DOWNTOWN
LIVING THAT FOLKS WANT TO
ENJOY.
IT SEEMS TO ME THE PROJECT
PROPONENTS PUT A LOT OF TIME
AND EFFORT INTO DESIGNING A
STRUCTURE THAT PEOPLE WILL VERY
HAPPILY MOVE INTO.
I GUESS THAT'S DISRUPTIVE TO
THE NEIGHBORHOOD BUT IT SEEMS
TO ME TO FIT PRETTY WELL.
I AGREE WITH THE CALLER WHO
POINTED OUT THE FACT THAT THIS
IS A RIGHT PROJECT AND WE'RE
REALLY IN THE POSITION WHERE WE
HAVE TO APPROVE IT REALLY
EMPHASIZES THE POINT THAT WE
SHOULD BE CAREFUL AS WE'RE
COMING BACK TO THE PLAN AND
THINKING TO THE LONG TERM
CONSEQUENCES.
THAT'S WHAT I'M WORRIED ABOUT
AND I THINK THAT'S WHAT A LOT
OF THE FOLKS AT THIS TABLE HERE
ARE ALSO WORRIED ABOUT WHAT ARE
THE LONG TERM IMPLICATIONS
OF THE DECISIONS WE'RE MAKING
AND WE'RE REALLY LISTENING TO
ALL THE COMMENTS WE'VE BEEN
GETTING.
I'M REALLY TALKING MORE ABOUT
THE THAT AT THIS POINT BECAUSE
YOUR PROJECT IS REALLY
HIGHLIGHTING THE WAY THIS
PROCESS WORKS.
IT'S A DRAWN OUT PROCESS.
THERE'S A LOGIC TO IT.
IT DOESN'T ALWAYS MAKE SENSE TO
FOLKS WHEN THEY JUMP INTO THE
SYSTEM LATE IN THE GAME BUT
THAT'S WHERE WE ARE NOW.
SO THE PROJECT I GUESS I'LL
JUST CLOSE OUT TO SAY A LOT
OF FOLKS MAYBE NOT EVERYBODY
GOT POSTCARDS.
THIS PROJECT HAS BEEN A LONG
TIME COMING.
IT'S NOW AT THE POINT WHERE
WE'RE SUPPOSED TO CONSIDER
WHETHER OR NOT IT COMPLIES WITH
ALL THE RULES AT THIS POINT IT
DOES.
WE HAVE NO DISCRETION.
I'LL BE VOTING TO APPROVE IT
BECAUSE I HAVE TO IF FOR NO
OTHER REASON.
>> THANK YOU, COMMISSIONER AND
COMMISSIONER.
LET LEATHERBY BE ANY OTHER
COMMISSIONERS.
JUST ONE LAST WHAT IS THE COLOR
THE COLOR I'M SORRY WHAT IS THE
COLOR AT THE MOMENT WE ARE IT
IS A LIGHTER WEIGHT.
IT'S KIND OF QUALITY TO IT AND
THEN THIS IS A SAGE SO THAT'S
WHERE WE'RE AT RIGHT NOW.
IT'S IT IS AN OFF-WHITE AND
SAGE WHICH YOU CAN SEE THE
RENDERINGS OK SO OPTIMISTIC.
I WANT TO PUT A LITTLE AMAZING
BLUE.
YEAH THAT'S GREAT.
THANK YOU.
THANK DIRECTION FOR MY PART I
WANTED TO START BY JUST ASKING
COMMISSIONER NORTON WENT
THROUGH THE SORT OF LEGALITY
OF THIS BUT WE SIT AT THE TABLE
YOU COME TO THE PODIUM AND WE
HAVE A CONVERSATION SO I WANTED
TO ASK THAT YOU DO TAKE TIME
TO
RESPOND TO COMMISSIONER
HAMMERSCHMIDT COMMENT AROUND
HONORING THE HISTORY SOMEWHERE
IN THE DEVELOPMENT.
SO WHETHER THAT'S A PLANT A
BLACK AREA RENDERING AN ART
INSTALLATION A STORY YOU COULD
ESTABLISH A WEBSITE WHERE
PEOPLE COULD SCAN THE QR
CODE AND THEY COULD LEARN ABOUT
HISTORY, THEY COULD HEAR THE
ACTUAL AUDIO ON THE THE
ANNOUNCEMENT WAS MADE AND
CAPTURE THAT SO THAT THEY HAVE
AN OPPORTUNITY TO ACKNOWLEDGE
THE PLACE THAT THEY FIND
THEMSELVES.
AND SO JUST WANT IT TO PASS
THAT ALONG FOR THE RESIDENTS
COMMUNITY STANDARDS CAN HELP
YOU MOVE SOMEBODY THAT IS
BLOCKING YOUR DRIVEWAY.
I LIVE VERY CLOSE TO THE
STADIUM AND PEOPLE DO NOT KNOW
THE LAW OF HOW FAR THEY CAN
PARK CLOSE TO MY DRIVEWAY AND
UNFORTUNATELY THEY HAVE BECOME
ACQUAINTED WITH COMMUNITY
STANDARDS BECAUSE THEY HAVE
BLOCKED OUR DRIVEWAY.
SO THAT IS AVAILABLE TO YOU
EVEN IF YOU ARE ABLE TO GET TO
PLANNING STAFF AND YOU ARE VERY
RESPONSIVE AND THEY COME OUT
AND THEY WILL ASK YOU DO YOU
WANT US TO TAKE IT OR DO YOU
WANT US TO TELL SO YOU ACTUALLY
GET CHOICE WHICH I THINK IS
REALLY GOOD.
I WANTED TO ASK STAFF MAYBE MR.
WINTER BECAUSE IT'S SORT
OF LIKE A COMPREHENSIVE LAND
USE FUTURE LOOK AHEAD WHERE
WILL WE BE ABLE TO NOW BUILD
COTTAGE CAUGHT IN OUR LOW RISE
RESIDENTIAL?
YES, THE VISION IS FOR THE
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
WE WOULD BE OPENING UP A LOT
OF NEW HOUSING OPPORTUNITIES
SUCH AS COTTAGE QUARTZ
TOWNHOMES, MULTIPLEX'S I THINK
THE CONVERSATION THIS EVENING
IS AN EXAMPLE OF HOW OVER TIME
WE HAVE REGULATED AWAY SOME
TYPOLOGIES THAT HAVE HELD A
VERY IMPORTANT HISTORY AND AN
IMPORTANT FUNCTION IN THE
EVOLUTION OF HOUSING IN A
VARIETY OF COMMUNITIES
INCLUDING THANK YOU UP THERE
THE RESIDENTS ALSO ARE
CONCERNED ABOUT THE CONDITION
OF LIWEI.
SO ANY ASSURANCES THAT YOU CAN
PASS ALONG THAT EITHER NOW OR
IN THE FUTURE IF YOU GO THROUGH
THIS PROCESS I THINK WOULD BE
APPRECIATED.
WE ARE ALSO CONCERNED ABOUT WHO
IS ULTIMATELY GOING TO BE
RESPONSIBLE FOR SNOW REMOVAL.
DOES THAT FALL TO THE CITY OR
IS IT BECAUSE OF THESE TWO
DEVELOPMENTS?
IT'S A SHARED AGREEMENT FOR
SNOW REMOVAL IN THIS ALLEYWAY.
THAT'S AN EXCELLENT QUESTION.
ALL RIGHT.
IF YOU HAVEN'T HEARD THE CITY
TRIES VERY HARD TO REMOVE SNOW
FROM A LOT OF PUBLIC LAND IF
THE CITY TAKES THAT ROLE FOR
THIS PUBLIC, I'M SURE IT'S A
LOWER PRIORITY SHAMOKIN A LOT
OF THE RIVERS I DON'T KNOW THE
ANSWER.
I AM HAPPY TO FOLLOW UP ON THE
INTERNET AT LEAST THAT I HAVE
ANY RIGHT TO TELL YOU THIS BUT
YOUR CONDOMINIUM ASSOCIATION
MAY WANT TO REACH OUT TO THE
DEVELOPER TO SEE IF YOU CAN
COME UP WITH AN AGREEMENT THAT
WOULD BE AMENABLE TO BOTH
OF YOU.
UH, I WANTED TO SETTLE A
QUESTION I HAD IN MY HEAD AND
IT TAKES ME TO THE TENTH
EDITION OF EDC PAGE TWO EIGHTY
SEVEN IT'S UNDER ALPHABET FOR
THE SUSTAINABILITY COMPONENT
CAN YOU LAY TO REST FOR ME A
BIT OF CONFUSION THAT I HAVE.
DOES IT REQUIRE THAT THE
BUILDING IS ALL ELECTRIC FROM
DAY ONE OR DOES JUST REQUIRE
THAT IT IS ELECTRIC CAPABLE OR
ALL ELECTRIC CAPABLE?
YES, THAT'S WHAT I THOUGHT THE
ANSWER WAS GOING TO BE.
NO, I APPRECIATE THE
FLEXIBILITY OF WHAT YOU NEED
BUT WHAT I DID MY TEAM IS THAT
WHEN THE SUSTAINABILITY
COMPONENT IS BEING REQUESTED,
OUR MODE OF INTERPRETATION IS
TO ASK FOR DOCUMENTATION THAT
ELECTRICITY IS AVAILABLE AND
CAN POWER THAT BUILDING IF THAT
IS AVAILABLE EVEN IF THERE IS A
COST THEN IT MUST BE FULLY
ELECTRIC.
IF FOR SOME REASON THAT ANSWER
FROM GTE IS THAT WE DO NOT HAVE
THE CAPACITY THEN WE WOULD I
WOULD INTERPRET THAT TO ALLOW
THAT THE BUILDING BE FUTURE
PROOF TO ALLOW THAT IN THE
FUTURE SINCE I'VE INSTRUCTED MY
APPROACH WE HAVE YET TO GET A
LETTER SAYING DC CANNOT PROVIDE
CAPACITY BUILDING SO OUR
STANDARD IS IT HAS TO BE ALL
ELECTRIC ON DAY ONE OF THE
CODE HAS SOME FLEXIBILITY IN
THE PRODUCT FLEXIBILITY AND
THAT IS IN THE WAY WE ARE USING
THAT FLEXIBILITY IS IF ELECTRO
ELECTRIC CAPACITY CANNOT BE A
ONE BEDROOM ALTERNATIVE
APPROACH CAN BE CONSIDERED.
>> OK, THANK YOU AND I CANNOT
SEE THE RESIDENT BEHIND YOU
MARK I'M SORRY SO YOU HAD FIVE
THINGS YOU GAVE US THREE.
WHAT WERE THE OTHER TWO?
>> SO IS THE FOUNDATION THAT
WAS THE THRESHOLD IN IT WAS THE
MECHANICAL AND THEN YOU HAD TWO
ADDITIONAL THINGS.
YES, I WANT TO EXPRESS
APPRECIATION FOR THE CARE
OF THE STORM WATER WATER
MANAGEMENT ISSUES THAT I KNOW
I'VE LOOKED YOU HAVE HELPED ME
UNDERSTAND ALSO THE
CONSIDERATION OF THE TRAFFIC
AND THE OVERALL PROJECT
MANAGEMENT THAT INVOLVES
NEIGHBORS AND I PART OF WHAT WE
TRY TO DO IS EVEN THOUGH THIS
IS A BAD RIGHT DEVELOPMENT, WE
DO LISTEN TO EVERYTHING THAT
YOU SAY WE TAKE WE'RE
RESIDENTS.
WE'RE YOUR NEIGHBORS.
WE CARE ABOUT THE CITY IN THE
SAME WAY I WALK ACROSS THE
STREET FROM THE DEVELOPMENT AND
JUST THIS WEEK THE DEVELOPER
DECIDED TO PARK SOME EQUIPMENT
AND MY PARKING LOT WE HAD A ALL
DAY EVENT FOR NARCOTICS
ANONYMOUS AT OUR CHURCH ON
SATURDAY AND I HAD NO WAY
OF KNOWING WAS THAT EQUIPMENT
GOING TO THERE OR WAS IT GOING
TO BE MOVED AND IT WAS GOING TO
IMPACT THAT USE THEY WHAT WE
WERE ABLE TO DO WHICH IS WHAT
WE ARE COMMITTING TO YOU IS TO
GET SOMEONE'S TELEPHONE NUMBER
SO THAT LIKE I DID YOU CAN CALL
SOMEONE AND SAY HERE'S WHAT
NEEDS TO HAPPEN.
IT'S EITHER GOING TO GET TOWED
OR THEY CAN COME AND MOVE IT
AND THAT'S WHAT ONE CALL THIRTY
MINUTES LATER EVERYTHING IS
RESOLVED AND I THINK THE MORE
WE CAN EXCHANGE I THINK THE
BETTER THE OUTCOME CAN BE.
SO THANK YOU SO MUCH FOR THIS
DEVELOPMENT.
THANKS FOR BRINGING IT LOOKS
INCREDIBLE.
I LOVE THE ATTENTION TO THE
LIGHT.
I'M ESPECIALLY APPRECIATIVE
OF BECOMING WHERE IT IS IN
TERRYTOWN AND I LOOK FORWARD TO
THIS DEVELOPMENT HAPPENING.
THE OTHER QUESTION I HAD WAS
THE FARMERS MARKETS MAIN
BUILDING WAS CONDEMNED.
CORRECT.
AND IT'S BEING RECONSTRUCTED AT
SOME FUTURE DATE AND THE
MAJORITY OF THE FARMERS MARKET
IS UNDER AWNINGS.
IS THAT CORRECT?
BECAUSE SOMEONE TALKED ABOUT
THE BUILDING POTENTIAL BLOCKING
SUNLIGHT TO THE FARMER'S
MARKET.
SO I WAS HAVING A HARD TIME
SEEING HOW THAT WAS ALL GOING
TO FLOW TOGETHER.
ALL RIGHT.
WE HAVE MOVED.
WE HAVE SECONDED.
WE'VE HAD OUR PUBLIC
DISCUSSION.
DOES ANYONE HAVE A FINAL WORD
BEFORE WE GO TO OH MANAGER
CALEDONIUS, I'M SORRY TO TO
KEEP YOU FROM HAVING TO FIRE ME
LATER OR I MAY EXIT AFTER THIS
AGENDA ITEM YOU CAN EMAIL
PLANNING EIGHT TO A BAG AND
WE'LL FIND ITS WAY TO ME AND I
CAN COMPILE SOME RESOURCES
RELATED TO ENFORCEMENT AND HAVE
IT IF NEEDED MAKE A CONNECTION
BETWEEN YOUR NEIGHBORHOOD
ASSOCIATION COMMUNITY
ASSOCIATION, THE DEVELOPER OR
YOU CAN REACH ME SPECIFICALLY
AT AGE KELLY HK E E Y AT A TWO
NETWORK AND I'D BE HAPPY TO
SHARE RESOURCES WITH YOU HERE
AS I'M PLANNER FOR THIS
PROJECT.
MISS THATCHER J THATCHER T H A
C H E R AT A DUO NETWORK.
ALL RIGHT YOU HAVE YOUR SEATS
READY TO VOTE NOW AT THIS TIME
MANAGER KELLY WOULD YOU DO A
ROLL CALL VOTE I THINK IS WHAT
IS REQUIRED.
COMMISSIONER WISCH YES MR.
HAMMERSCHMIDT YES COMMISSIONER
APRON'S YES.
COUNCIL MEMBER DISH YES
COMMISSIONER.
YES.
COMMISSIONER WETHERBEE YES
COMMISSIONER.
YES COMMISSIONER.
YES THAT CARRIES THANK YOU AND
GOOD LUCK WITH YOUR PROJECT.
WE'RE GOING TO RECESS FOR FIVE
MINUTES.
WE'LL BE BACK AT EIGHT TWENTY
TWO
STILL HERE.
OH I JUST CALLING OUR MEETING
BACK TO ORDER.
WE NOW ARRIVE AT ITEM NUMBER
TEN OTHER BUSINESS BEFORE WE DO
THE STAFF INTRODUCTION WITH
PLANNER BINIT COMMISSIONER
ADAMS HAD A QUESTION ABOUT
TIMELINE I WANTED HIM TO
PROPOSE I JUST WANT TO MAKE
SURE THAT I'VE GOT A REALLY
GOOD SENSE FOR WHAT HAPPENS
NEXT WHERE WE ARE AND SOME LIKE
QUESTIONS WHAT HAPPENS IF SO WE
HAVE ONE MORE MEETING SCHEDULED
BEFORE WE NEED TO BE OUT OF THE
DOCUMENT AND THAT'S A WORKING
MEETING NEXT WEEK.
MY UNDERSTANDING IS THAT THERE
WAS A MEETING THAT ON THE
SEVENTEENTH TO DISCUSS CHANGES
TO THE PLAN BUT THAT AS I
UNDERSTAND IT IS OUR LAST TIME
IN THE DRAFT AFTER THAT STAFF
TAKES EVERYTHING WE'VE GIVEN
THEM MAKES A FINAL TURN AND
WHAT WE GET BACK IN MID-JULY
SHOULD BE VIEWED AS MID FINAL
SORRY DIGITALIZE FINAL AND ANY
EDITS WE MAKE AT THAT POINT
WILL ADD COST OR DELAY OUR
TIMING.
BUT I'LL STOP AT SOME POINT TO
LET YOU CORRECT WHAT I SCREWED
UP.
SO AS I UNDERSTAND THAT JULY
MEETING SHOULD BE VIEWED FROM
WHERE WE SIT TODAY AS WE CAN
REALLY ONLY DO SHOWSTOPPER
STUFF AT THAT POINT.
BUT IF WE START MESSING WITH
LANGUAGE WE'RE GOING TO WE'RE
AT A PRESS PUSH OUR TIMING OUT
.
SO I GUESS HAD I MORE OR LESS
LAID THAT OUT CORRECTLY, IF WE
SCHEDULE ADDITIONAL MEETINGS IN
BETWEEN WE TALK ABOUT IT, IT'S
WE SHOULD PROBABLY UNDERSTAND
THAT WE'RE GOING TO BE PUSHING
OUR OUR OUR TIMELINE OUT BY
SOME AMOUNT OR RISKING THAT
THEN WE NEED TO CONVERT THEM IN
THE NEXT MEETING FROM WORKING
TO REGULAR.
THAT'S A LOT BUT LIKE I'LL TRY
YEAH.
UM AS FAR AS I KNOW AND I'VE
JUST CONFIRMED WITH MANAGER
KELLY THAT NEXT WEEK'S MEETING
HAS ALREADY BEEN CONVERTED TO A
REGULAR SESSION AND WE'VE DONE
THAT BECAUSE IN WORKING
SESSIONS WE CAN'T MAKE MOTIONS
OR DECISIONS AND WE MIGHT NEED
TO.
SO THAT HAS ALREADY BEEN
CONVERTED.
THAT IS THE LAST MEETING FOR
THIS FIRST ROUND OF EDITS AND
THEN WE HAVE GIVEN THE
CONSULTANTS ABOUT A MONTH TO
MAKE THOSE EDITS.
IT WOULD COME BACK TO YOU IN
THE MIDDLE OF JUNE.
WE CAN HAVE SOME DISCUSSION
THEN ABOUT THAT ABOUT THE NEW
DRAFT BUT WE'VE SCHEDULED THREE
ROUNDS OF EDITS SO IT'S NOTHING
IT'S FINAL AND IN JULY, JUNE OR
JULY IT WILL COME BACK TO YOU
IN JUNE THERE CAN BE
DISCUSSION.
THERE COULD BE ANOTHER ROUND
THAT IT'S IF WE NEEDED TO BUT
IN JULY IT IS COMING BACK TO
YOU TO START THE REVIEW PROCESS
WHICH IS QUITE LENGTHY BECAUSE
IN JULY YOU WILL HAVE TO
FORWARD IT TO CITY COUNCIL AND
THEN IN AUGUST IT WILL GO TO
CITY COUNCIL AND THEY ARE
PERMITTING IT WITH THEY ARE
PERMITTING THE SIXTY THREE DAY
REVIEW PERIOD TO BEGIN.
>> SO THEN FROM AUGUST TO
OCTOBER IT'S IN THE OFFICIAL
STATE STATUTE.
SIXTY THREE DAY REVIEW PERIOD
AND THEN IT WOULD COME BACK TO
YOU AGAIN IN OCTOBER FOR YOUR
PUBLIC HEARING AND IF YOU
RECOMMEND IT IT WILL THEN GO TO
COUNCIL AND THAT WOULD BE
SCHEDULED I THINK IT'S NOVEMBER
17TH FOR THEIR PUBLIC HEARING
AND THAT WOULD BE THE FINAL
APPROVAL.
SO THERE ARE STILL JUNE JULY
FOR SOME EDITS AND THEN THE
SIXTY THREE DAY REVIEW PERIOD
THERE'S STILL TIME FOR EDITS I
GUESS WAS THAT THE JULY REVIEW
SHOULD BE VIEWED AS FINE TUNING
AT MOST WE SHOULD NOT BE
EXPECTING WE NEED TO BE MAKING
TWEAKS AT THAT RIGHT.
WE'D PREFER THAT THERE'S NOT
MASSIVE CHANGE AT THAT POINT.
>> RIGHT.
OK, THAT WOULD PROBABLY THROW
THE TIMELINE OFF BUT THAT'S WHY
WE'RE DOING THESE SIX MEETINGS
IN A ROW NOW TO GET THROUGH THE
KIND OF HEAVY CHANGES.
COMMISSIONER, I WANT TO JUST
KEEP THIS GOING.
WE'VE BEEN GETTING JUST A HUGE
VOLUME OF COMMENTS WHICH IS
GREAT.
WE'VE BEEN ASKING FOR THEM.
OH MY GOSH, I'M DOING MY BEST
TO TRY AND GET ON TOP OF THEM
ALL AND MAKE SENSE OUT OF THEM
AND I'M A LITTLE BIT CONCERNED
WHAT'S THE PROCESS WE'RE GOING
TO USE TO MAKE SURE THAT WE'VE
CAREFULLY CONSIDERED ALL OF THE
FEEDBACK WE'VE BEEN GETTING AND
WHAT'S THE PROCESS THAT WE'LL
USE OF DURING THAT SIXTY THREE
DAY COMMENT PERIOD?
WE GET LOTS OF FEEDBACK THAT WE
NEED TO CONSIDER AND GIVE GOOD
FAITH CONSIDERATION INTO.
SO HOW DO WE MAKE SURE THAT ALL
OF THAT HAPPENS?
SO IT'S STUFF WE'VE BEEN
TALKING ABOUT HOW TO CATALOG
ALL OF THESE AT THIS POINT I
WOULD SAY FROM JANUARY TWENTY
TWENTY FIVE UNTIL NOW WE GET
ANYWHERE FROM A HALF A DOZEN TO
SIXTY AND THEY'RE ALL IN YOUR
AGENDA SO THEY'RE ALL PUBLIC.
BUT IN TERMS OF LIKE GOING
THROUGH THEM AND PICKING OUT
MAJOR THEMES AND ALL OF THAT
WOULD BE VERY TIME INTENSIVE
FOR STAFF.
BUT WE HAVE STARTED TALKING
WITH OTHER DEPARTMENTS THAT
MIGHT BE ABLE TO HELP US DO
THAT.
SO THAT IS STILL A GOAL OF OURS
TO GET THROUGH ALL OF THOSE
EMAILS.
BUT WE HAVE NOT STARTED THAT.
YEAH, MR. CHAIRMAN, I MAKE A
COMMENT YOU MAY I KNOW THERE
ARE A LOT OF I HEAR FROM PEOPLE
THAT FOLKS STALWARTS WATCH OUR
MEETINGS FROM HOME AND THEN GO
BACK AND WATCH WATCH REPLAY
REPLAYS OF THEM WHICH IS GREAT.
I WANTED TO I MADE SOME POINTS
DURING THE LAST PRESENTATION
WHICH IS MAYBE A LITTLE BIT OUT
OF ORDER BECAUSE IT WAS NOT ON
TOPIC BUT IT'S HIGHLY GERMANE
TO THE PROCESS WE'RE GOING
THROUGH NOW.
MY WHOLE POINT ABOUT THE
POSTCARDS AND THE RETURN RATES
AND THE PARTICIPATION AND THE
RULE OF THUMB FOR PLANNERS IS
THAT FOLKS REALLY DON'T PAY
MUCH ATTENTION WHEN YOU'RE
DOING THE PLAN AND ALL THE
UPFRONT IMPORTANT STUFF AND
THEN WHEN A REAL PROJECT COMES
OUT THEN THEY COME OUT OF THE
WOODWORK BECAUSE THEY'RE REALLY
UNHAPPY BECAUSE NOW THEY CAN
SEE WHAT'S HAPPENING.
SO I WOULD HAVE EXPECTED FOR A
PROJECT THAT WAS GOING TO HAVE
A REAL TANGIBLE IMPACT ON THE
NEIGHBORHOOD TO HAVE GENERATED
A WHOLE LOT OF FEEDBACK FROM
ALL OF THE POSTCARDS THAT WERE
SENT OUT.
AND EVEN IF FOLKS SAY THEY GOT
THE POSTCARD, I THINK YOU CAN
MAKE A GOOD CASE.
A WHOLE LOT OF PEOPLE THAT
POSTCARDS AND VERY FEW PEOPLE
SHOWED UP AND IF YOU DO SOME
BASIC MATH, IF WE SENT OUT THAT
POSTCARDS TO EVERYBODY IN THE
CITY, I WOULD NOT EXPECT TO GET
MANY MORE PEOPLE TO SHOW UP AND
ENGAGE THAN WHAT WE'RE GETTING
THROUGH ALL OF THE EXTRA
EFFORTS THAT THE PLANES F HAS
BEEN DOING TO FACILITATE
FACILITATE THESE EFFORTS.
SO I GUESS THE POINT I WANT TO
MAKE FOR THE RECORD IS WE'RE
REALLY MAKING A GOOD FAITH
EFFORT TO REACH OUT TO
EVERYBODY TO SOLICIT COMMENTS
AND I'M LOOKING AT WHOEVER
WHEREVER THEY ARE TO REALLY
LISTEN CAREFULLY TO WHAT WE'RE
HEARING AND PROCESS IT AND
RECONCILE ALL OF THE CONFLICTS
AND I THINK IT'S MORE WORK FOR
THE STAFF BUT I THINK MAKING A
REALLY GOOD FAITH EFFORT TO
CATALOG THE FEEDBACK WE'RE
GETTING MAKE GOOD SENSE OF IT
AND AND CONTEMPLATE IT IS
REALLY IMPORTANT GIVEN THE
KINDS OF FEEDBACK WE'RE
GETTING.
I WANT TO MAKE SURE THAT THAT
HAPPENS.
THAT SAID, I'M PRETTY CLEARLY
IN A LOT OF THE SAME THINGS
OVER AND OVER AGAIN.
I THINK IT'S NOT GOING TO BE
THAT MUCH WORK TO REALLY BOIL
DOWN INTO THE ESSENCE HERE.
THE DIFFERENT POSITIONS WE'RE
HEARING AND THE ARGUMENTS AND I
DON'T THINK WE NEED TO PURGE
THE PROCESS TO COLLECT MORE
FEEDBACK BECAUSE I JUST DON'T
AT THIS POINT WHERE WE'RE GOING
TO HEAR THINGS THAT WE HAVEN'T
ALREADY HEARD FROM THE FEEDBACK
WE'VE BEEN GETTING.
SO I GUESS I'M RESPONDING NOW A
LITTLE BIT TO THE FEEDBACK WE
GOT A LITTLE BIT EARLIER I'M
NOT SEEING YET A GOOD REASON TO
PAUSE IT OTHER THAN FOLKS JUST
DON'T WANT IT TO HAPPEN AND SO
THEY WANT TO PAUSE IT TO MAKE
IT NOT HAPPEN.
I DON'T THINK WE CAN REALLY DO
THAT BUT I DO WANT TO MAKE SURE
THAT WE MAKE EVERY EFFORT THAT
WE POSSIBLY CAN TO ABOUT THE
GOOD FEEDBACK WE'VE GOTTEN TO
REALLY THINK ABOUT IT CAREFULLY
CONTEMPLATE IT AND MAKE SURE
WE'RE PUTTING THAT INTO A
DECISION MAKING AND I KIND
OF WANT TO BE OPEN TO MAYBE NOT
HITTING A DEADLINE IF IT TURNS
OUT WE NEED THE TIME TO REALLY
PROCESS THE FEEDBACK, GET IN
AND MAKE SURE WE DO IT RIGHT.
SO I GUESS I'M I DON'T TRYING
TO BALANCE THAT A LITTLE BIT
BUT I WANT TO GO ON THE RECORD
THAT WE SHOULD TRY AND STAY ON
SCHEDULE.
WE SHOULDN'T LIKE SKIP OVER
REALLY IMPORTANT STUFF FOR THE
SAKE OF STAYING ON SCHEDULE.
THANK YOU FOR ME LETTING ME BE
ON A SOAPBOX A LITTLE BIT.
YOU ARE AND WITH THAT
COMMISSIONER MS.
I THINK THERE'S CONVERSATION
AROUND PROCESSES REALLY
IMPORTANT AND HELPFUL AND I
WOULD LIKE ONE IF WE CAN JUST
EITHER DISCUSS MORE DETAIL NOW
OR LET ME KNOW WHEN WOULD BE
THE APPROPRIATE TIME TO DISCUSS
MORE DETAIL.
>> SO WHAT DETAIL DO YOU GO
INTO IN JUNE WE GET THE SECOND
DRAFT BACK.
>> WILL WE DO THIS SAME PROCESS
WHEN WE SCHEDULE FIVE MEETINGS
FIVE ONE SIX OUR MEETINGS AND
GO PAGE BY PAGE THERE ARE
PEOPLE LAUGHING THAT I THINK
IT'S ACTUALLY I NEED TO KNOW
WHAT IS THE PROCESS BY WHICH WE
ARE GOING TO CONFIRM THAT
CHANGES WE REQUESTED WERE MADE
CATALOG NEW CHANGES DISAGREE
WITH THE WAYS IN WHICH CHANGES
WERE MADE AND SO I DON'T I'M
NOT SAYING WE NEED TO DO IT
THIS WAY BUT IT'S ONE WAY WE'VE
TRIED IT AND BUT IF THAT WAS
THE CASE THEN I WOULD SAY WE
INSTEAD OF THOSE MEETINGS NOW
BECAUSE JUNE IS YEAH, IT'S ME
SO I'M OPEN TO YOUR FEEDBACK ON
THAT.
I WAS NOT PLANNING TO GO
THROUGH SIX SIX HOUR MEETINGS
AGAIN BECAUSE THAT'S THE
PURPOSE OF THIS ROUND IS TO GET
THROUGH MAYBE THE LARGER
CONCEPTUAL QUESTIONS THAT WE
HAVE AND THE DATA THAT WE'RE
LOOKING FOR TO HAND THAT OVER.
AND SO THE SECOND VERSION
SHOULD REFLECT MOST OF THAT.
I THINK IT WILL BE MORE OF A
REFINING PROCESS THAN A FULL
BLOWN EDITING PROCESS WE'VE
DONE.
>> WOULD IT BE SAFE TO ASSUME
WE COULD DO IT IN HALF THE TIME
AND WE SHOULD SCHEDULE THREE
LONG MEETINGS
?
WE DON'T DECIDE TONIGHT BUT
MAYBE IT'S OK TO PUT IT OUT
THERE.
WE SHOULD DECIDE SOON.
I WOULD URGE US TO DECIDE SOON.
OK AND I DON'T KNOW THE US IS
THERE WHETHER THAT'S HOW WE
THINK WE DEBATE AS A BODY AND
TAKE A STRAW POLL ON OR YOU
WANT TO OR START TO THINK ABOUT
IT AND WELL I DON'T WANT TO
HOLD UP I DON'T TO AUGUST SO
IT'S LIKE WE COULD MOVE ON FROM
THIS AS LONG AS I FEEL
COMFORTABLE KNOWING WHEN WE'RE
THIS THIS IS OUR TABLE.
>> THIS IS OUR CONVERSATION.
>> WE'LL GO TO A COMMISSION
WHETHER IT BE SO KIND OF JUST
TO ADD TO THAT I NOTICED THAT
SOME OF THE COMMENTS THAT WE'RE
GETTING BACK NOW ARE THE
RESULTS FROM THE PUBLIC
MEETINGS AND THEY'RE LINKED
OFTEN TO A STREET OR A
NEIGHBORHOOD AND AND I DIDN'T
THINK THAT WE WERE REALLY
NECESSARILY GOING TO BE AT THAT
LEVEL AT THIS POINT.
BUT I KNOW WE ALSO HAVE A BIG
MAP OF A BIG MAP BUT UH, YOU
KNOW, WHEN WE GET LIKE WHAT IS
WHERE OUR LIMITS ARE WE TALKING
ABOUT WHAT IS THE SPECIFICITY
WE'RE GETTING TO IN THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN RELATIVE TO
ALL THIS OR VERSUS THE ZONING
IF WE'RE LOOKING AT STREET
NAMES NOW LIKE THAT TO ME ADDS
A WHOLE ANOTHER LEVEL
OF SPECIFICITY THAT I WASN'T
SURE WE WERE GOING TO GET INTO
AT THIS POINT MAYBE WE ARE THE
STREETS AREN'T TO SAY LIKE THIS
IS HOW YOU SHOULD ZONE ON MY
STREET.
I THINK THAT WAS A REQUEST
EITHER FROM THIS COMMISSION OR
COUNCIL THAT IF WE'RE GOING TO
COLLECT FEEDBACK THAT WE KNOW
GENERALLY WHERE PEOPLE ARE
COMING FROM.
>> I MEANOME OF THE COMMENTS
THOUGH ARE SPECIFIC TO LIKE THE
STREET SHOULD BE TRANSITION OR
THIS STREET SHOULD BE X OR Y
AND WE ARE TAKING SOME OF THAT
UP.
SO THE NEWARK FOR EXAMPLE,
THERE THERE'S SOME CONVERSATION
AROUND MILLER WHETHER IT SHOULD
BE IN TRANSITION OR NOT.
AND SO THAT HAS BEEN AT THE
TABLE AND I THINK WHEN YOU GET
TO SOME OF THE CONVERSATION
AROUND THE TRANSITION ZONE
TONIGHT, THAT WOULD BE THE
PLACE THAT THAT WOULD COME UP.
I DON'T KNOW IF THAT GOES ALL
THE WAY DOWN TO KENSINGTON
WHICH CAME THROUGH PUBLIC
COMMENT.
I JUST WANT IT THE BROAD
CONVERSATION TO HAPPEN THERE
WHICH WAS THERE WAS A NEIGHBOR
WHO WAS CONCERNED THAT THEIR
STREET WHICH IS CURRENTLY OUR
ONE B WAS GOING TO GO TO LIGHT
INDUSTRIAL.
SO THAT KIND OF BROAD
CONVERSATION I THOUGHT WE COULD
JUST ANSWER VERY EASILY WHICH I
THINK MR. WEINER DID AND THEN
THEY LEFT SATISFIED THAT YOU
MAY TALK TO YOU MORE ABOUT WHAT
WAS IN THE SIX COMMENTS.
YEAH, OK.
SORRY THAT THE BRITISH JUST THE
SAME I JUST WANTED TO SPECIFY
AGAIN I THOUGHT THAT YOU'RE
RAISING THE QUESTION ABOUT THE
ADJOINING RESIDENTIAL TO THE TO
THE M DISTRICT WAS REALLY GOOD
BECAUSE IT REASSURED SOMEONE
WHO CLEARLY WAS WAS NEEDING
REASSURANCE.
BUT I ALSO SAW IN THE
ENGAGEMENT SUMMARY A NUMBER
OF REFERENCES TO JONES DRIVE
AND TREVOR AND ALL KINDS
OF THINGS THAT I DON'T REALLY
WANT TO TALK ABOUT.
I MEAN IT JUST SEEMS VERY
STRANGE TO TALK ABOUT IT RIGHT
NOW BECAUSE MY UNDERSTANDING
WAS FROM AN ENGAGEMENT EVENT
THAT WE WERE ALL AT THAT THERE
ISN'T THESE AREN'T MEANT TO BE
EXACTLY THIS IS EXACTLY WHERE
THE LINES ARE AT THIS STAGE AND
I JUST FEEL LIKE WE WERE BIOG
OURSELVES DOWN IF WE GET IT TO
THAT LEVEL OF DETAIL.
SO I WASN'T GOING TO RAISE ANY
OF THAT AND I JUST WANT TO MAKE
SURE BECAUSE SINCE COMMISSIONER
WHETHER IT BE RAISED IT BUT MY
INSTINCT WAS OK ON THAT I THINK
I THINK THAT'S FINE AND
ESPECIALLY AS WE COME TO THE
TRANSITION ZONE BECAUSE I THINK
THAT'S THE PLACE WHERE WE'RE
GOING TO HAVE THE MOST
CONVERSATION BECAUSE SOME THAT
MAKES SENSE.
THESE ARE THE OUR CONVERSATION
LAST WEEK WITH COMMISSIONER
ADAMS AND THE UNDERLYING ZONING
AND WHERE WE ARE POLICING
TRANSITION.
BUT I DON'T I WOULD AGREE AND
CONCUR WITH YOU COUNCIL MEMBERS
THE THAT YOU DON'T WANT TO GO
STREET BY STREET BASED ON THAT
FEEDBACK AND I TRUST THAT STAFF
IS AGGREGATING AND PUBLIC THAT
UP IF WE NEED TO GIVE ATTENTION
TO YEAH.
SO WE'RE STILL IN THAT PROCESS.
YOU HAVE A REALLY HARD JOB.
YOU HAVE TO NOT ONLY DO YOU'RE
RIGHT IT'S PLAN.
YOU HAVE TO SIMULTANEOUSLY
CONSIDER WHAT WE'RE DELIVERING
TONIGHT WHICH IS SOME CITY
STAFF PERSPECTIVES AND SOME
PUBLIC PERSPECTIVES AND SO
WE'RE GOING TO CONTINUE TO
SHARE THOSE PUBLIC PERSPECTIVES
AND IT WAS RAISED TONIGHT
ANOTHER DESIRE FOR US TO DO
SOME SYNTHESIS OF SOME OF THAT.
BUT WE'VE HEARD THE
COMMISSIONER OUR THOUGHTS ON
THAT.
I WANT TO BE CLEAR ALL RESPONSE
THAT WE HAVE GOTTEN ON THIS HAS
BEEN SHARED WITH YOU.
IT HAS BEEN IN ALL OF YOUR
PACKETS.
IT IS PUBLICLY SHARED.
I UNDERSTAND THAT THAT IS NOT A
QUANTITATIVE ANALYSIS AND GRAPH
BREAKING IT DOWN TO SAY THAT X
PERCENT OF THE PEOPLE IN THOSE
EMAILS SAY THAT YOU SHOULD STOP
THE PROCESS.
SO WE'RE GOING TO CONTINUE TO
WORK ON THAT.
BUT THE GOAL OF THAT FUTURE
LAND USE MAP ENGAGEMENT THAT WE
INCLUDED WAS AND I IF WE HAVE
TIME WE'RE GOING TO SPEND SOME
TIME WITH THE FUTURE LAND USE
MAP AND I THOUGHT IT WAS
APROPOS OF THAT TO SHARE WITH
YOU SOME OF THE FEEDBACK THAT
WE WERE GETTING FROM THE PUBLIC
AS PART OF THIS.
YEAH, I DON'T I WOULDN'T
ENVISION WE WOULD GO THROUGH
THAT IN A LINE BY LINE ITEM BUT
I WANTED TO ARM YOU WITH THE
TENOR OF THE CONVERSATION SOME
OF THE FEEDBACK THAT WE ARE
GETTING AND TO BE CLEAR,
COMMUNITY BUILDING IS NOT
LINEAR OFTEN IT'S NOT ALWAYS
QUANTITATIVE OR QUALITY.
SOMETIMES IT'S IT'S A MIX
OF BOTH.
UM AND SO I DON'T I DON'T
PRESENT THOSE TO YOU THAT THEY
NEED TO BE RESOLVED ON THE LINE
BY LINE BASIS.
I PRESENT THEM TO YOU AND THE
CORRESPONDING MAP IN CASE THERE
IS SOMETHING OF A THEME THAT
YOU WERE INTERESTED IN
EXPLORING.
BUT AS PART OF YOUR REVIEW
OF CHAPTER FIVE IN THE LAND USE
MAP WE DO WANT TO HEAR FROM YOU
IF THAT MAP REFLECTS YOUR
VISION FOR THE COMMUNITY OR IF
IT DOESN'T ALL RIGHT.
IT'S THAT COMMISSIONER ADAMS.
ALL RIGHT.
WITH THAT I WILL INTRODUCE
SENIOR PLANNER MICHELLE BENNETT
WHO HAS ASKED THAT WE REFER TO
HER AS MICHELLE DURING THESE
CONVERSATIONS.
SHE DOES A STAFF INTRODUCTION.
WE HAD A SMALL CONVERSATION.
WE'RE GOING TO TALK ABOUT SOME
OF THE HOUSING, SOME OF THE
INFRASTRUCTURE, SOME OF THE
FEEDBACK THAT HAS BEEN RECEIVED
AND THEN WE'LL GO TO CHAPTER
FIVE.
>> YES.
AND SO AS PART OF MY
RECOMMENDATION IS THAT MAYBE
THIS EVENING WE'RE NOT GOING
PAGE BY PAGE BECAUSE THERE'S A
LOT OF CONTENT HERE AND IT'S
ALREADY ALMOST NINE O CLOCK.
I THINK A LOT OF THE CONTENT
THAT WE'RE SHARING TONIGHT WILL
BE VERY INFORMATIVE FOR YOU
THAT WE COULD PICK UP THIS
DISCUSSION NEXT WE GOING PAGE
BY PAGE AND THAT'S PARTLY
BECAUSE WE HAD SCHEDULED NEXT
MEETING TO BE FOR CHAPTER SIX.
BUT CHAPTER SIX IS THE
IMPLEMENTATION MATRIX WHICH IS
BASED ON OUR GOALS AND
STRATEGIES AND MANY OF THOSE
ARE IN FLUX AT THE MOMENT.
SO I THINK THAT WE COULD PICK
THAT UP MAYBE ON THE SECOND
ROUND OF EDITS AND REALLY
DEVOTE MORE OF OUR TIME TO
CHAPTER FIVE.
>> BUT WE ARE WE'RE GOING TO DO
ALL BY TIME SO WE'LL WE'LL SEE
WHERE WE ARE AND THEN WE'LL
HAVE WE'LL FIGURE OUT WHICH
PART WE WILL CONTINUE TONIGHT
AND WHICH PART WE WILL REFER TO
NEXT WEEK.
>> SO WITH THAT OK, THANK YOU.
YEAH YOUR I WANTED TO START
WITH SOMETHING THAT WAS IN YOUR
PACKET LAST WEEK THAT WE DIDN'T
GET TO.
I DON'T KNOW IF WE NEED A LARGE
DISCUSSION ON THIS.
I'LL LEAVE IT UP TO YOU BUT I
WANTED TO SAY IN RESPONSE TO UM
A LOT OF PUBLIC INPUT THAT WE
DON'T HAVE A STRONG ENOUGH
BASIS FOR SOME OF OUR CLAIMS
THAT I HAVE WORKED ON THIS
DRAFT SUMMARY OF HOUSING
LITERATURE.
I SUPPOSE I OPEN THIS UP TO YOU
TO LET ME KNOW IF YOU FEEL
COMFORTABLE WITH THIS BECAUSE
THIS IS SOMETHING THAT I PLAN
TO PUT IN A HOUSING APPENDIX
THAT I'M WORKING ON TO PROVIDE
A LITTLE BIT MORE OF THAT
DETAIL THAT PLANNING COMMISSION
AND RESIDENTS HAVE ASKED FOR.
SO I THINK THERE'S ABOUT TEN
SOURCES HERE THEY'RE LARGELY
ACADEMIC BUT THEY ARE ALSO
REFERENCING SOME OF OUR OWN
CITY STUDIES LIKE THE WASHTENAW
COUNTY THE WASHINGTON COUNTY
HOUSING AFFORDABILITY ECONOMIC
EQUITY EX ANALYSIS.
OUR ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT REPORT
AND THEN LARGELY LIKE I
MENTIONED ACADEMIC WITH SOME
REFERENCES HERE TO THE AMERICAN
PLANNING ASSOCIATION AND THE
MICHIGAN ASSOCIATION
OF PLANNING RESOURCES.
>> UM, SO I SUPPOSE I'D OPEN
THAT UP TO YOU JUST BECAUSE WE
DIDN'T GET A CHANCE TO TALK
ABOUT IT LAST TIME.
>> BUT SO FOR EVERYBODY
EDIFICATION IF YOU GO INTO
REGISTAR AND PICK UP THE FOUR
TWENTY NINE CITY PLANNING
COMMISSION AGENDA, IT'S GOING
TO BE ITEM EIGHT AND THERE IS A
LINK WITH TWO LINKS INSIDE
OF IT QUESTIONS AND EDITS FOR
CHAPTER FOUR AND THEN THE DRAFT
SUMMARY HOUSING LITERATURE
WHICH THEN HAS TEN REFERENCES
AND CITATIONS.
THANK YOU.
YOU'RE ALL
I HAVE NO COMMENTS.
I WOULD JUST YOU'RE JUST GIVING
HER FEEDBACK.
YES WE ARE OPEN MIKE SO YOU
DON'T NEED TO GET RECOGNIZED
BECAUSE I MIGHT NOT TURN MY
HEAD IN FULL DISCLOSURE I HAVE
NOT READ ALL THESE STUDIES BUT
I HAVE READ SOME OF THEM AND I
THINK IT'S A GREAT COLLECTION
AND I THINK THE ADDITION
OF THIS IN THE APPENDIX IS
WELCOME AND THANK YOU.
>> I WOULD AGREE THAT I'M ALSO
MIGHT IF IF YOU COULD ADD LIKE
HOW YOU DID THE SEARCH FOR THE
LITERATURE WHAT LIKE HOW YOU
FOUND THESE STUDIES JUST SO
THAT WE DON'T GET POTENTIALLY
ACCUSED OF PUTTING IN THINGS
THAT SUPPORT THE ONLY THINGS
THAT WE WANT.
I MEAN IT'S LIKE HOW DID YOU GO
ABOUT LIKE FINDING THESE
PARTICULAR STUDIES?
OH YEAH I KNOW THAT'S A GREAT I
AND I THINK IT WAS A DIRECTION
FROM US IS WHAT PRODUCE THIS WE
ASKED FOR IT THEN YOU WENT
AHEAD AND DID IT LIKE WHAT DID
SHE LIKE HOW DID SHE LIKE YOU
GO WHEN YOU'RE DOING REVIEWS
LIKE THE DATES THAT YOU
SEARCHED FOR AND WHY SHOULD YOU
SHE SPECIFICALLY ASKED AT THE
TABLE THE CHOICES THAT I WILL
MAKE SOME PEOPLE WILL CONSIDER
THEM TO BE X, Y AND Z.
ARE YOU OK WITH THAT?
AND THE COMMISSION SAID YES.
SO I IN ANSWER TO YOUR QUESTION
THOUGH YOU CAN ANSWER IT
YOURSELF.
I WOULD START WITH OUR
DIRECTION AS YOUR RESPONSE TO
COMMISSIONER HAMMERSCHMIDT IF
YOU WANT TO GO INTO MORE DETAIL
IT WOULD BE WELCOMED.
THAT'S FINE TO JUST A LITTLE
LIKE INTRO OF LIKE WHERE THIS
CAME FROM.
>> YOU SHOULD BE ABLE TO GET
THAT OUT OF THE TRANSCRIPT.
I'M SORRY COMMISSIONER, JUST
PLEASE SPEAK UP BECAUSE YOU
KNOW I LIKE WHAT YOU DID.
>> I THINK IT'S A GREAT START.
I WOULD ENCOURAGE YOU WE HAVE
EXPERTS REALLY CLOSE WHO REALLY
KNOW THIS STUFF REALLY WELL WHO
I'M SURE WOULD BE HAPPY TO CHAT
WITH YOU JUST TO MAKE SURE
WE'RE NOT MISSING ANYTHING
IMPORTANT.
I WOULD SUGGEST YOU TALK TO
PROFESSIONAL KANSAS AT THE LAW
SCHOOL AND PROFESSOR LONDON AND
URBAN REGIONAL PLANNING
PROGRAM.
IT'S A THAT'S THE WHOLE HOUSING
THING IS A REALLY COMPLICATED
AND YOU RUN AT SOME RISK IF YOU
OVERSIMPLIFY IT AT THE SAME
TIME, IF YOU JUST KIND OF KEEP
FALLING BACK AND SAY WELL IT'S
REALLY COMPLICATED, WE CAN'T DO
ANYTHING, WE DON'T DO ANYTHING.
SO I THINK IT'S A GREAT START.
BUT I WOULD ENCOURAGE YOU JUST
A QUICK EMAIL TO THEM AND MAYBE
SHARE IT WITH THEM AND SEE IF
THEY HAVE ANY THOUGHTS.
IF YOU'VE NOT DONE THAT ALREADY
.
>> I KNOW THAT'S EXTREMELY
SUGGESTIVE.
I DID REVIEW HER PAGE.
I THINK SHE WRITES PRIMARILY
ABOUT LATEX AND DOES
COMPARATIVE STUDIES BETWEEN THE
US AND CHINA.
UM, I'M HAPPY TO REACH OUT TO
HER AND I WOULD NEED LAW
PROFESSORS CONTACT BUT I'D BE
HAPPY TO REACH OUT TO HER.
>> I HAVE HIS CONTACT AND I'VE
SPOKEN WITH HIM.
OK, DID YOU GET WHAT YOU
NEEDED?
YES, BUT FOR THIS WHOLE TOPIC
WORKS HERE.
THE OTHER PERSON THAT I'VE HAD
A LOT OF CONTACT NOT
SURPRISINGLY IS JONATHAN LEVINE
WHO LIVES ACROSS THE STREET
FROM ME SO YEAH.
AND THEN ZACH ACKERMAN HAD A
LITTLE REVIEW DONE A FEW YEARS
AGO BY A PHD STUDENT AND I'LL
BE REVIEWING THAT AND PASSING
THAT ALONG TO MICHELLE AS WELL
AND WE CAN GET IN TOUCH WITH
HIM AND ASK HIM IF WE CAN USE
SOME OF HIS IF WE DECIDE TO USE
ANY OF THE SOURCES.
SO WE'RE I THINK WE'RE DOING
PRETTY WELL BETWEEN THE TWO
OF US AND I GIVE MORE THAN
THAT.
>> SO WE HAVE MORE THAN LESS
THAN AN HOUR TO PARTICIPANTS IN
THE CHAMBER.
MR RESCORLA NOT THERE IS A
STUDY THAT WAS AUTHORED BY A
LOCAL U OF M UH PROFESSOR THAT
TALKS ABOUT HOW ELIMINATING
SINGLE FAMILIES LEARNING IS NOT
ENOUGH THAT THERE ARE SOME
OTHER THINGS TO DO AND IT
HIGHLIGHTS FOUR AREAS IF YOU
COULD SOURCE GOT IT.
SO IF WE COULD SENT IN TO US.
RIGHT.
SO THAT THAT CAN ALSO BE THERE
AS WELL BECAUSE THEY OFFER FOR
ADDITIONS TO THE ELIMINATION
OF SINGLE FAMILY ZONING AND SO
IT'S SORT OF SUPPORTS AND I
THINK ALIBER HAS ENGAGED WITH
THE FOUR RECOMMENDATIONS
AUTHORS PAPER THAT ALREADY IN
THE AGENDA.
I DON'T THINK IT'S ALREADY I
BELIEVE IT SHOULD BE OK.
THANK YOU.
>> LET'S TALK INFRASTRUCTURE
ALRIGHT INFRASTRUCTURE WEEK YOU
HEARD ANYTHING ABOUT
INFRASTRUCTURE SO FIRST OF ALL
I WANT TO GIVE SOME KUDOS TO
OUR PUBLIC SERVICES AND PUBLIC
WORKS COLLEAGUES.
THEY'RE DOING GREAT WORK IN
THIS REGARD AND THEY'RE DOING
IT SERENDIPITOUSLY AT THE SAME
TIME THAT YOU'RE DOING A
COMPREHENSIVE AND ONE OF THE
ASPECTS OF THAT IS INCLUDED IN
YOUR PACKET AND WAS SHARED
WHICH IS A SUMMARY OF SOME
OF THE EVALUATION OF CAPACITY
AT OUR WATER AND WASTEWATER
PLANTS.
SO JUST TO BROADLY TALK A
LITTLE BIT ABOUT THIS WHEN WE
HAVE BEEN UNDERTAKING THIS
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN WE HAVE BEEN
BROADLY TALKING TO THE
COMMUNITY ABOUT OUR VISIONS AND
OUR GOALS AND I THINK THAT'S
APPROPRIATE.
THAT'S WHAT A COMPREHENSIVE
PLAN SHOULD BE.
IT SHOULD BE IT SHOULD BE
VISIONARY.
IT SHOULD BE ASPIRATIONAL.
IT SHOULD BE AN OPPORTUNITY
WHEN I TALK ABOUT ALL THE WAYS
THAT WE INTERACT WITH THE
PUBLIC TALKING ABOUT ASPECTS
OF THE PLAN, IT'S KIND OF THE
MOST WIDE OPEN AND THE MOST
BROAD AND THE MOST FLEXIBLE
ABOUT THE AREAS WE GO INTO AND
THE VISIONS AND ASPIRATIONS WE
GET TO.
AND AS MY AS COMMISSIONER
NORTONS NEXT TO ME HERE ABOUT
IN ANOTHER CONTEXT BY THE TIME
YOU GET TO PLAN APPROVAL THERE
IS ALMOST NO ROOM FOR
DISCUSSION.
THERE IS IT IS VERY NARROW.
IT IS AN ADMINISTRATIVE PROCESS
AND OF COURSE A LOT HAPPENS IN
BETWEEN THAT.
BUT AS PART OF THAT WE'VE BEEN
TALKING ABOUT THE CITY
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN IN A VERY
BROAD BASE THAT MEANS
RIGHTFULLY SO AS ARE ARE
INTENDED TO DO TO NOT ONLY TALK
ABOUT OUR LAND USE PLAN BUT
ALSO CAREFULLY CORRELATE THOSE
DECISIONS.
THOSE LAND USE DECISIONS ARE
REGULATORY DECISIONS WITH
INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENTS.
THAT IS ONE OF THE CORE VALUES
OF A COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND THE
CORRESPONDING CAPITAL
IMPROVEMENTS PLAN AND THE
DECISIONS THE CITY MAKES.
SO THIS MEMORANDUM IS INTENDED
TO JUST HIGHLIGHT THAT
UNSURPRISINGLY I THINK TO
ANYBODY WE ARE SEVERAL
CENTURIES OLD CITY WITH A LOT
OF OLD INFRASTRUCTURE AND WE'VE
GOT A LOT OF NEEDS.
THE PUBLIC SERVICES TEAMS ARE
IN THE PROCESS PUTTING A LOT
OF FINE POINTS ON WHAT THOSE
NEEDS ARE AND THEY'RE GOING TO
BE BURIED HERE.
WE ARE TRYING TO JUST AT A VERY
HIGH LEVEL TALK ABOUT WHEN
WE'RE TALKING ABOUT JUST PLANT
CAPACITY.
SO I WANT TO BE CLEAR THAT THIS
MEMO IS NOT TALKING ABOUT
DISTRIBUTION'S SYSTEMS, WHICH
IS A DETAILED ANALYSIS THAT'S
BEING UNDERTAKEN NOW.
BUT I ALSO WANT TO BE CLEAR
THAT NOT ALL DETAIL ABOUT OUR
INFRASTRUCTURE DISTRIBUTION
SYSTEM IS GOING TO BE PUBLICLY
ACCESSIBLE.
THERE ARE SECURITY REASONS WHY
WE'RE NOT TO BE MAPPING OUT THE
DETAILS OF ALL OF OUR
INFRASTRUCTURE SYSTEM SO THAT
WORKS UNDERWAY WHICH I'M REALLY
EXCITED ABOUT BUT IN THE
MEANTIME THIS IS TRYING TO
COLLABORATE SOME OF THE HOUSING
PRODUCTION TARGETS THAT ARE IN
THE PLAN THAT YOU SUBSEQUENTLY
REMOVED THAT WERE DOUBLE AND
TRIPLE WHAT OUR CURRENT HOUSING
PROJECTIONS ARE AND HOW THOSE
MIGHT TRANSLATE OVER THE TIME
PERIOD OF OUR COMPREHENSIVE
PLAN.
AND SO I'M REALLY GRATEFUL FOR
PUBLIC SERVICES THAT THEY HAVE
HELPED TO FRAME SOME OF THOSE
DECISIONS AND PARTICULARLY DRAW
YOUR ATTENTION TO A COUPLE
OF CHARTS.
WHAT YOU SEE IS BASICALLY WHERE
DIFFERENT GROWTH RATES MIGHT
HIT 80 PERCENT CAPACITY IN
THESE PLANTS AND AT 80 PERCENT
CAPACITY IS IMPORTANT FOR A
COUPLE OF REASONS.
ONE IS WHEN YOU'RE TALKING FOR
EXAMPLE, ABOUT WATER DELIVERY
SPECIFICALLY WE GIVE SOURCE A
LOT OF OUR WATER FROM THE HERE
ON RIVER AND SO WE WANT TO
BUILD FLEXIBILITY TO MAKE SURE
THAT IN THE CASE OF HIGHER
LOWER PERIODS OF DROUGHT OR
MOISTURE WE HAVE THE ABILITY TO
CONTINUE TO SERVE.
BUT IT'S ALSO MORE PRACTICALLY
A GOOD TRIGGER WHEN WE ACTUALLY
START TALKING TO THE STATE
ABOUT HEY, WE'RE GETTING AT OUR
80 PERCENT CAPACITY, IT'S TIME
FOR US TO START TALKING ABOUT
WHAT OUR LONG TERM INVESTMENT
STRATEGIES ARE.
SO THIS IS INTENDED TO JUST BE
HONEST AND FORTHRIGHT ABOUT
SOME OF THE CHALLENGES THAT WE
FACE.
THERE WILL ALSO BE
INFRASTRUCTURE DISTRIBUTION
SYSTEMS THAT IS BOTH SANITARY
SEWER COLLECTION SYSTEM AND OUR
WATER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEMS THAT
THOSE ASPECTS ARE TYPICALLY
MORE ADDRESSED ON A PROJECT BY
PROJECT BASIS.
YOU HEARD AN EXAMPLE OF THAT
TONIGHT WITH SOME WATER MAIN
INVESTMENTS HAPPENING TO
SUPPORT THAT SPECIFIC PROJECT.
BUT HERE WE'RE STARTING TO
ARTICULATE WHAT WE ARE TALKING
ABOUT MORE BROADLY ABOUT OUR
PLANT CAPACITIES.
SO WHAT THIS MEANS IS SOME
OF THE LANGUAGE THAT IS GOING
TO BE REFLECTED IN THE PLAN
WE'VE ALREADY STARTED TALKING
ABOUT.
THOSE ARE THE PLANS IS AS WE'RE
TALKING ABOUT THE
IMPLEMENTATION OF THESE PLANS
IS GOING TO HAVE TO BE REALLY
CALIBRATED TOWARDS THESE
INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENTS.
RIGHT.
IT'S NOT LIKE WE'RE GOING TO BE
ABLE TO JUST FLIP A SWITCH,
EXPECT THAT WE'RE GOING TO
REALIZE THE FULL GROWTH
POTENTIAL OF THIS PLAN IN YEAR
ONE NOR WILL THAT HAPPEN.
THAT'S NOT HOW COMMUNITIES
DEVELOPMENT.
WE DON'T HAVE THE CAPACITY
DEVELOPERS OR CAPITAL PROBABLY
MARKET AT THIS POINT.
BUT OVER TIME AS WE START
BUILDING IT, THIS IS SOMETHING
THAT WE NEED TO BE MINDFUL
OF AND IT MAY VERY WELL
PRIORITIZE THE AREAS OF THE
CITY THAT WE MOVE QUICKLY IN
LAND USE PROVISION AND CHANGES
AND AREAS THAT MIGHT HAVE TO BE
MORE CAREFULLY CALIBRATED
TIMING WITH INFRASTRUCTURE
INVESTMENTS WHETHER IT'S WATER
OR SANITARY SEWER OR OTHER
SYSTEMS FOR
THAT MATTER.
SO WE CAN'T THINK THAT THIS IS
ANOTHER OPPORTUNITY, THAT SWEET
SPOT AFTER WE GET THROUGH THIS
FIRST ROUND OF PLAN AND IT'S
THAT IF YOU'D LIKE TO HEAR MORE
WE'RE HAPPY TO BRING PUBLIC
SERVICES STAFF WHO ARE PROBABLY
GOING TO BE EMAILING ME AFTER
THEY WATCH THIS AND TELL ME
WHAT I GOT WRONG.
BUT I'M HAPPY TO STOP NOW AND
SEE IF YOU HAVE ANY QUESTIONS.
I'M SORRY YOU GOT TO ASK
QUESTIONS.
>> THIS IS GREAT AND I JUST
HAVE ONE CLARIFYING QUESTION
THE LOW END POPULATION
PROJECTION IN THE HIGH END
POPULATION PROJECTION THAT FROM
THE PLAN THE NUMBERS THAT WE
HAD.
>> YEAH, PEOPLE WITHIN IN THE
OBJECTIVES THE OBJECTIVES OF IT
WAS TWENTY FIVE TIMES TWELVE
HUNDRED OR UNITS TWO TIMES OR
THREE TIMES OUR CURRENT.
THANKS.
OH I SEE THE TABLE THAT'S I
WOULD ADD AND I THINK THAT THIS
IS REALLY REALLY HELPFUL.
I FEEL LIKE I KNOW JUST ENOUGH
ABOUT IT PROBABLY MORE THAN I'D
WATER INFRASTRUCTURE TO BE
DANGEROUS RIGHT.
THE FACT THAT PARTICULARLY ON
OUR WASTEWATER SIDE WE'RE SO
WE'RE BELOW CAPACITY THERE'S A
LOT OF CAPACITY THAT SUGGESTS
TO ME THAT THERE IS OPPORTUNITY
COST ASSOCIATED, THAT THERE'S
SOME INCREMENTAL COST BUT
THERE'S A FIXED COST ASSOCIATED
WITH JUST KEEPING THE
WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT
GOING.
AND SO AGAIN FOR SOME PERIOD
OF TIME THINGS GET CHEAPER ON A
PER UNIT BASIS USING IT TO ITS
CAPACITY.
RIGHT.
IT'S IT'S EFFECTIVELY I DON'T
WANT TO SAY OVERBUILT BUT I
MEAN IT'S BUILT FOR GROWTH.
IT'S IT'S ANTICIPATE THAT.
SO I THINK THAT THAT IS WHEN I
LOOK AT THE WASTEWATER
TREATMENT ONE IN PARTICULAR I
THINK LIKE OH THIS MAKES A
WHOLE LOT OF SENSE.
IT FEELS TO ME LIKE ON THE
DRINKING WATER SIDE THE WAY
THAT I READ THOSE GRAPHS
ALREADY THINGS WE'RE GOING TO
GET CLOSE AND SO WE SHOULD BE
THINKING ABOUT WHAT THAT LOOKS
LIKE AND IT ALSO MAKES ME
WONDER WHAT ARE SOME OF THE
BIGGER USERS OF WATER AND I
KNOW THAT WE'VE RECENTLY.
WELL, SINCE I'VE LIVED IN TOWN
WE'VE MOVED TO PRICING WATER
WHERE THE FIRST LIKE BASIC
HUMAN NEEDS ARE CHEAPER AND
THEN WE ESCALATE THE PRICES.
IF YOU ARE A SUPER USER
OF WATER BUT ALSO IT MAKES ME
THINK ABOUT LIKE HOW MANY
PEOPLE ARE MONITORING THEIR
LAWNS WASHING THEIR CARS AND
LIKE IF THERE'S ACTUALLY WATER
SAVINGS CAN HELP MAKE US NOT
NECESSARILY HAVE TO THINK ABOUT
NEW WATER TREATMENT PLANT IN 20
30 OR SO AND I JUST DON'T I
DON'T KNOW WHAT THAT'S LIKE.
MY ASSUMPTION IS THAT THIS CURB
PROBABLY ASSUMES THAT THE
PEOPLE OF THE FUTURE THE FUTURE
IN ARBITRATES WILL BE USING THE
WATER THE SAME WAY THAT PERSON
IN ARBITRATES ARE AND I HOPE
THAT WE CAN BE MORE SUSTAINABLE
IN OUR WATER USE.
SO THAT'S WHAT I'M READING FROM
THOSE GRAPHS IS THAT FEEL LIKE
CORRECT INTERPRETATIONS AND
JUST I THINK YOU'RE ALSO
GETTING AT IT MAYBE YOU'RE
GETTING AT HOW HOW ON SORT OF A
PER CAPITA BASIS OF WATER AND
SANITARY ALSO INVOLVES RIGHT.
WITH MORE EFFICIENT FIXTURES
AND JUST MORE MINDFULNESS ABOUT
OUR USE OF RESOURCES.
SO THERE'S A LOT OF MOVING
PARTS TO IT.
SO THAT'S WHY A LOT OF THIS
ANALYSIS HAS HAPPENED AND WHY
IT'S HAPPENING SO THAT WE CAN
STAY ON TOP OF ALL OF THOSE
TRENDS AND THE LIKE TO MAKE
SURE THAT IN THE CONTEXT
OF IT'S MOVING TARGETS.
>> BUT THE ONE THING WE WANT TO
BE REALLY MINDFUL OF IS TO MAKE
SURE THAT WE CAN SAY YES WE ARE
SORRY BUT JUMPED IN.
BUT IF WE HAVE IF WE CAN SEND
QUESTIONS BACK TO THE WATER
FOLKS, I WOULD ASK SPECIFICALLY
ABOUT THAT LIKE WATER USE BY
KIND OF HOUSING IF THERE'S ANY
INFORMATION OR IF THAT'S
ALREADY COOKED INTO THE SHAPE
OF THOSE LINES SUGGESTS TO ME
THAT THEY'RE JUST EXPECTED
LINEAR RATHER THAN KIND OF PER
CAPITA USE GOING DOWN.
BUT I DON'T KNOW AND I DON'T I
DON'T KNOW WHAT THAT LOOKS.
I DO THINK OVER TIME IF I'M
REMEMBERING CORRECTLY THAT IT
HAS GONE DOWN OVER TIME RIGHT.
WITH THE NEW TECHNOLOGY AND
AWARENESS OF THIS.
>> SO THAT'S ONE TREND I'M
AWARE OF IN THIS CASE.
YEP.
COMMISSIONER, I HAVE A COMMENT.
I'M SO THIS IS VERY HELPFUL.
I DIDN'T HAVE A CHANCE TO READ
IT WORD FOR WORD I PRESUME THE
FLAT LEVELS THEY'RE SHOWING
THIS WAS A THOUGHT EXERCISE.
THIS IS WHAT OUR CURRENT
CAPACITY IS RIGHT NOW.
IF IT NEVER CHANGED, HERE'S
WHERE WE WOULD HIT IT.
BUT I GOT TO BELIEVE THEY'RE
LOOKING AT LONG TERM PLANNING
CONSTANTLY AND YES, THAT WAS
GOING TO BE MY COME AT THINGS
AS THEY GO ALONG.
AND I KNOW THAT THE JORDAN
RIVER WATERSHED COUNCIL HAS
BEEN QUITE INTERESTED IN DEMAND
MANAGEMENT TRYING TO BETTER
INSTEAD OF MAKING MORE AND MORE
WATER, TRYING TO GET PEOPLE TO
USE IT MORE CONSCIOUSLY
EFFECTIVELY.
AND I THINK THAT'S I IMAGINE A
CITY WATERING SHORT TERM FOLKS
ARE PAYING ATTENTION TO THAT
TOO.
RIGHT.
SO THIS IS A THOUGHT EXERCISE
JUST TO SHOW FOLKS WE ARE AWARE
OF WHAT'S HAPPENING AND WE'RE
AWARE OF HOW INCREASES IN
DEVELOPMENT THAT MIGHT BE
PROMPTED BECAUSE THE MASTER
PLAN COULD AFFECT WATER
PLANNING BUT WE'RE ACTIVELY
ENGAGING IN WATER PLANNING ALL
THE TIME.
IS THAT A CORRECT STATEMENT?
YES.
YEAH.
AND THAT'S JUST TO BE MORE
BLOWING UP MY COLLEAGUES.
I'M REALLY GRATEFUL THAT THEY
SPENT THE TIME WITH THEIR
EXPERTS TO SORT OF WE SORT
OF GAVE IN THE CHALLENGE.
CAN YOU CONTEXTUALIZE THE
ANALYSIS THAT YOU'RE DOING TO
OUR COMPREHENSIVE PLAN BECAUSE
IT MIGHT BE OF VALUE TO THIS
BODY AND TO THE CITY COUNCIL.
I UNDERSTAND THAT BUT
ABSOLUTELY THAT'S EXACTLY WHY
THEY'RE DOING THIS BECAUSE THEY
NEED TO BE MINDFUL AND WE AS A
COMMUNITY NEED TO BE PLAN FOR
REGARDLESS OF THIS
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN THE LAST ONE
OR THE NEXT ONE.
SO I WANTED TO ASK WHERE ARE
THE STRATEGIC PLAN FOR THE
WATER SINCE THESE ARE THE
REPORT BECAUSE THEY ARE
REPLACING NINETEEN THIRTY NINE
IN THE NINETEEN FORTY PLANT
THEY HAVE THAT IN THEIR HORIZON
AND I IMAGINE THAT WILL
INCREASE CAPACITY AS LONG AS IS
ADEQUATE SOURCE.
YES AND NONE THAT IS REFLECTED
IN THIS CHART SO SO MY CONCERN
IS A LOT OF WHAT WE HEAR FROM
THE COMMENTS IS WE CAN'T BUILD
ANYTHING BECAUSE WE DON'T HAVE
THE INFRASTRUCTURE TO BUILD IT.
BUT WHAT I SEE IN THESE
STRATEGIC PLANS BOTH IN THE
WATER DEPARTMENT READING THERE
TWENTY TWENTY THREE STRATEGIC
PLAN RIGHT.
WHICH I THINK IS THE LAST ONE
THEY PRODUCED AND THEN THE
SEWER EXCUSE ME THE WASTE WATER
STRATEGIC PLAN WHICH WAS
PRESENTED TO COUNCIL AT THE
WHAT IS THE MEETING CALLED THE
WORK SESSION BOTH OF THOSE
GROUPS ARE WORKING TOWARDS
INCREASING CAPACITY SO IT IS
NOT I WANT TO BE CAREFUL I WANT
TO SAY THIS I WANT TO SAY IT IS
NOT FACTUALLY ACCURATE THAT OUR
INFRASTRUCTURE CANNOT HANDLE
THE DEVELOPMENT THAT WE
ANTICIPATE IN THE COMPREHENSIVE
LAND USE.
WELL, SO TWO THINGS IF I COULD
JUST START THERE ARE LIMITS TO
HOW THERE IS A LIMIT TO OUR
SOURCE AND I THINK THAT'S
THAT'S STATED HERE IN THE
BEGINNING.
EAGLE ONLY ALLOWS US TO DRAW A
CERTAIN AMOUNT OF WATER FROM
THE CROWN RIVER BUT WE HAVE A
SECONDARY SOURCE.
>> THE SECONDARY SOURCE AS FAR
AS I KNOW ARE OUR WELLS AND WE
HAVE WE ARE GETTING FIFTEEN
PERCENT FROM THERE RIGHT NOW.
CORRECT.
AND WHILE WE WERE UNDER SOME
OF THE TRANSITION THEY WERE
GOING TO INCREASE THAT DRAW SO
THAT THEY COULD INCREASE I
DON'T THINK IS GOING TO BE
SUBSTANTIAL.
OK, BUT YES, I MEAN THEY ARE
LOOKING AT HOW TO EXPAND.
I THINK ONE THING THAT'S
IMPORTANT TO NOTE THOUGH IS
THAT THIS IS SAYING TEN YEARS
IS NOT THAT LONG FOR FOR LONG
TERM PLANNING.
RIGHT.
THAT WITH OUR CURRENT
PROJECTIONS BY TWENTY THIRTY
FIVE ISH WE'RE GOING TO BE
HITTING OUR OUTER LIMITS.
>> SO AT GROWTH AT THE HIGH END
GROWTH RATE SO THE ANSWER IS
YES AND NO.
I MEAN PART OF THIS PROCESS
RIGHT IS WE'RE DETERMINING HOW
WE WANT TO GROW AND THEN WE CAN
WORK THROUGH THE CAPITAL
IMPROVEMENT PLAN TO INVEST
WHERE WE CAN TO PROVIDE THIS
GROWTH OVER TIME.
>> OK, COMMISSIONER, IT BE
SORRY SO KIND OF ALONG THOSE
LINES.
SO ONE OF THE THINGS THAT I
DON'T SEE IN HERE AND IT'S FINE
LIKE THIS IS THIS IS HELPFUL IN
ITSELF.
BUT THEN THERE'S ALSO AND I
KNOW THIS IS A BIG OLD CAN
OF WORMS BUT THE WE HEAR A LOT
AGAIN OF LIKE NEW DEVELOPMENT
IS IS A DRAIN ON THE SYSTEM AND
IS THERE SOME WAY THAT IS THERE
A WAY OF SORT OF SUCCINCTLY PUT
IN LIKE WHAT NEW DEVELOPMENT
CONTRIBUTES MONEY WISE WHAT YOU
KNOW LIKE LIKE THIS IS SORT
OF LIKE OH OK, OUR WATER IS
REALLY CLOSE.
WE SHOULDN'T BUILD ANY MORE AND
AND I JUST DON'T LIKE IS THAT A
RATIONAL RESPONSE?
AND THEN THE OTHER THING WHICH
I THINK I REMEMBER FROM MR
DANCE'S REPORT IS ONE OF THE
PROBLEMS IS PEOPLE ARE
CONSERVING WATER WHICH MEANS
THAT THE CITY IS GETTING LESS
MONEY FOR WATER AND THAT CAN BE
A DOWNSTREAM PROBLEM THAT THAT
THERE ARE A LOT OF KIND
OF UNINTENDED CONSEQUENCES OR
IT'S NOT AN EASY THING OF LIKE
OH WE'LL USE LESS WATER WILL
BUILD A NEW PLANT.
WE'LL DO THAT LIKE THERE'S A
LOT OF KIND OF THINGS THAT ARE
BUILT INTO THAT AND I DON'T I
DON'T KNOW IF THERE'S AN EASY
WAY TO SAY THAT.
I THINK CELEBI
A BETTER
QUESTION TO HAVE THAT TEAM
ADDRESS.
I WILL SAY THAT FOR FUNDING
UTILITY INVESTMENTS IS
INCREDIBLY COMPLICATED AND
LIMITED IN THE STATE
OF MICHIGAN DEVELOPMENT
GENERALLY PAYS FOR ITS WAY IN
DEVELOPMENT AS IT RELATES TO
THE PROXIMITY OF THE SITE THAT
IT'S HAPPENING SO AGAIN TONIGHT
YOU HEARD AN EXAMPLE WHERE THEY
ARE INVESTING IN PUBLIC
INFRASTRUCTURE TO ACCOMMODATE
THEIR THEIR NEEDS FOR THAT SITE
IN THE CONTEXT OF OUR SYSTEM
THEY ARE ALSO IN ADDITION TO
THAT THEY ACTUALLY ALSO ARE
MAKING A CONTRIBUTION TO THE
CITY THAT IS SORT OF A LEGACY
CALCULATION OF IF THEY HAD BEEN
THERE CONTRIBUTION TO THE
LEGACY OF THE SYSTEM OPERATING
AND BEING INVESTED IN AND BEING
BUILT OVER TIME THAT THEY HAVE
NOT BEEN A USER PART OF THAT
THEY'RE NOT GOING TO BENEFIT IN
THE FUTURE.
SO THOSE ARE WAYS THAT THEY DO
THAT.
TO BE CLEAR, THERE IS NOT A
THIRD CONTRIBUTION THAT THEY
ARE MAKING THAT AUTOMATICALLY
RESULTS IN AN INCREMENTAL
CAPACITY INCREASE IN EITHER
OF THE PLANTS.
THAT'S PART OF THE FINANCING.
IT'S REALLY COMPLEX BECAUSE
THERE'S ACTUALLY VERY DETAILED
CONSTRAINTS ABOUT WHAT NEW
USERS CAN CONTRIBUTE TO THAT
AND WHAT EXISTING USERS ARE
EXPECTED TO CONTRIBUTE THAT TO
THAT.
SO SO THAT THEY GET THING TO
BRING THEM IN TO FORM MORE
BASIS.
BUT THAT'S A LITTLE BIT ABOUT
HOW DEVELOPMENT IN ADDITION TO
I GUESS THE FEES THAT I'VE
MISSED IS THAT PROVIDES USERS.
SO WHEN YOU'RE TALKING ABOUT
USERS OF WATER AND USERS WHO
ARE GETTING BILLED FOR SANITARY
FLOW THAT IS ANOTHER USER
PAYING FOR THE SYSTEM BUT IT IS
A COMPLEX WEB THAT IS NOT IT
DOESN'T AUTOMATICALLY
INCREMENTALLY GROW THAT SYSTEM
IN A SIMPLE WAY.
SO IS IT CORRECT TO SAY WE
COULDN'T DIVERT THE PARTS
CONTRIBUTION INFRASTRUCTURE
BECAUSE THERE ARE HARD LIMITS
ON WHAT NEW DEVELOPMENT COULD
CONTRIBUTE TO THAT
INFRASTRUCTURE CONTRIBUTION
VOLUNTARY YOU CAN DIVERT THAT
TO WHATEVER THANK YOU.
>> MICHELLE, DID YOU DO WHAT
YOU NEEDED?
I JUST WANTED TO MAKE ANOTHER
COMMENT AND I ALLUDED TO THIS
THAT THERE ARE SPECIAL
CONSTRAINTS AS WELL.
SO HERE WE'RE TALKING PURELY
ABOUT NUMBERS AND THEY ARE
STILL IN THEIR STUDY
INVESTIGATING WHAT PARTS OF THE
CITY ARE GOING TO BE MORE
CONSTRAINED.
SO THIS IS IMPORTANT TO START
BECAUSE IT IS KIND OF SHOWING
US SOME CONSTRAINTS IN OUR
VISION THAT WE STILL NEED TO
KNOW WHERE AS WELL AND WE'RE
WAITING ON THAT AND WOULD LIKE
TO ALSO PUT THAT IN THE PLAN
WHERE WE CAN.
>> I THINK THERE'S JUST A KIND
OF AN ISSUE OF PEOPLE NOT
UNDERSTANDING WHAT THOSE BUILD
SCENARIOS ARE.
I HEAR THEM TALKED ABOUT
TARGETS AND SOMETIMES THOSE
PROJECTIONS THOSE ARE ALREADY
DIFFERENT AND I HAVE BEEN
PERSONALLY THINKING OF THEM AS
CAPACITY ESTIMATES AND ZONING
ALONE DOES NOT DETERMINE
CAPACITY CAPACITY TURNS ALSO ON
THERE ARE LIMITING FACTORS
OF CONSTRUCTION COSTS,
INFRASTRUCTURE CAPACITY AND
RESIDENTS TOLERANCE FOR
DIVERSITY SO I FEEL LIKE WHAT'S
WHAT WE'RE GETTING IS SORT OF A
MISUNDERSTANDING THAT WELL YOU
GUYS ARE AIMING TO DO ALL
OF THIS AND I DON'T THINK
THAT'S THE WAY THOSE NUMBERS
WERE MEANT ON THE SLIDES WHEN
THEY WERE SHOWN AND I DIDN'T
FIND THEM.
THERE'S A SECTION WHERE THERE
ARE SOME NUMBERS BUT IT'S NOT
QUITE AS STARK AS IT WAS ON
THOSE SLIDES.
SO MAYBE WE COULD JUST BE MORE
CLEAR.
YEAH, I WAS CONFUSED BY THE
IDEA THAT WE ARE ESTABLISHING
THIS THIS BOARD IS ESTABLISHING
THE GROWTH OF THE CITY OF ANN
ARBOR.
I HAVE ACTUALLY SAID NO ONE HAS
TOLD US THE GROWTH IS GOING TO
BE WE ARE CREATING A
ENVIRONMENT WHERE GROWTH CAN
OCCUR AND IF IT OCCURRED AT
IT'S SORT OF LOW IN PROJECTIONS
IT WOULD PRODUCE THIS IF IT
OCCURRED AT ITS HIGH END
PROJECTIONS WITH THE AVAILABLE
CAPITAL IT WOULD PRODUCE THIS.
BUT I DON'T I WAS SURPRISED TO
HEAR THAT CONVERSATION
ESPECIALLY TONIGHT IN THOSE
COMMENTS BECAUSE I WAS I KNOW
WE HAD THAT CONVERSATION AND I
WAS LIKE NO ONE HAS TOLD US
WHAT THE GROWTH OF AN ARBOR
SHOULD BE.
SHOULD IT BE TWO TWENTY FIVE
SHOULD IT BE TWO FIFTY?
CERTAINLY COMMISSIONER NORTON
HAS SAID WE CAN'T STOP GROWTH
AND WE HAVE APPRECIATED THOSE
COMMENTS AND SO SINCE WE CAN'T
GO OUT WE MUST GO UP AND SO DO
IT.
>> DID YOU GET WHAT YOU NEED
IT?
YES, I THINK THE ONLY NOTE I
HAVE HERE IS THAT WE PROBABLY
NEED THEM TO COME IN AND GIVE
US MORE DETAIL AS THEY'RE
UNCOVERING IT THEMSELVES AND
MAYBE AS WE'RE TALKING ABOUT
THE FUTURE LAND USE MAP, WE
NEED TO TALK MORE ABOUT THIS
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN WHAT WE
HAVE HERE IN FRONT OF US, OUR
CONSTRAINTS AND WHAT WE VISION
FOR AND HOW WE WANT TO ADDRESS
THAT IN THE PLAN.
>> OK, ON TO
OK SO WHILE YOU
ALL HAVE BEEN REVIEWING THIS
PLAN, STAFF HAS ALSO BEEN
REVIEWING SPECIFIC SECTIONS
THAT ARE RELEVANT TO THEIR
EXPERTIZE.
UM, I FELT THAT IT WAS
NECESSARY TO SHOW YOU ALL SOME
OF THEIR COMMENTS IN WHICH THEY
DIVERGE FROM YOU AND IN GENERAL
WHERE THERE IS ALIGNMENT.
THESE ARE NOT ALL OF THEIR
COMMENTS.
THEY HAD MANY MORE BUT THAT
WERE NOT AS CONSEQUENTIAL.
SO WE CAN GO THROUGH THESE
DEPARTMENT BY DEPARTMENT IF YOU
LIKE.
BUT I WOULD SUGGESTHAT WE
START ACTUALLY AT THE BOTTOM OR
TOWARDS THE BOTTOM WITH
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT BECAUSE I
THINK THAT'S WHERE I SEE THE
MOST DIVERGENCE AND IT COULD
LEAD INTO SOME OF THE
CONVERSATION THAT WE MIGHT GET
INTO THIS EVENING AROUND FUTURE
LAND USE MAP.
>> UM, SO THIS IS A NEW OFFICE
JUST COMPRISED OF ONE PERSON
CURRENTLY UM BUT HE HAS READ
THROUGH AND PROVIDED COMMENTS
OVERALL FROM HIS PERSPECTIVE I
WOULD SAY THAT THERE IS A
PRIORITY ON HOUSING OVER OTHERS
OTHER ASPECTS OR OTHER GOALS
THAT WE'RE TRYING TO REACH AND
THAT THERE IS A CONCERN THAT
THERE ARE FEW PARCELS IN THIS
CITY THAT ARE REALLY RELATED TO
JOB GROWTH AND SO THIS KIND
OF HARKENS BACK TO SOME OF THE
CONVERSATIONS WE HAD IN THE
BEGINNING RIGHT ABOUT UM MY
MEMORY OF IT IS THE FLECK'S
DISTRICT RIGHT WHERE WE HAD
BEEN PERMITTING THAT AND THEN
HAVE SINCE DECIDED TO HAVE
HOUSING THERE.
SO THERE IS SOME CONCERN THERE
THAT THAT WHEN HOUSING IS
ALLOWED THAT WILL OUTCOMPETE
AND THAT WE WILL NOT HAVE AS
BALANCED OF A CITY OR A
BALANCED LAND USES THAT WE
SHOULD BE THINKING ABOUT FOR
TWENTY FIFTY.
UM, THAT'S MY QUICK SUMMARY
OF THE COMMENTS BUT THERE
THEY'RE ALL LISTED HERE.
SURE.
THAT I'M HAPPY TO OPEN UP FOR
DISCUSSION KICK US OFF IF
THAT'S OK.
I THINK ONE OF THE OBSERVATIONS
I'VE HAD IS HOUSING THIS
SUBMITTED AND A LOT MORE ZONES
THAN THE AVERAGE RESIDENT OR
SORT OF TRAVELER IN THE CITY
UNDERSTANDS.
SO OFFICE FOR INSTANCE PERMITS
HOUSING THE C DISTRICTS PERMIT
HOUSING SO THE IDEA THAT EVEN
IN THOSE ZONES HOUSING WOULD
WHEN WE'RE FINDING THAT NOT TO
BE TRUE IN THE BUILT
ENVIRONMENT AND SO IT MAY I
KNOW THIS CAME OUT OF A
CONVERSATION THAT WE'VE HAD AT
THE TABLE WHERE WE WERE TALKING
ABOUT ZONES AND I THINK IT
ACTUALLY PREDATED THE
COMPREHENSIVE LAND USE
CONVERSATION WHERE THE COMMENT
IF IT'S COMMERCIAL VERSUS
HOUSING GIVEN THE HOUSING
CONSTRAINTS HOUSING WILL WIN
EVERY TIME AND I JUST WE MAY
JUST NEED TO REVISE THAT
SENTIMENT JUST GIVEN THE FACT
THAT THAT IS NOT PLAYING ITSELF
UP.
THERE'S A LOT THAT IS ZONED FOR
HOUSING IN MY NEIGHBORHOOD THAT
HAS SAT EMPTY FOR FOUR YEARS.
>> I THINK NOW AND THEY
ACTUALLY LISTED IT ON ZILLOW SO
THIS IDEA THAT EVERY TIME LAND
BECOMES AVAILABLE THERE ARE
SPECULATIVE DEVELOPERS JUST
WAITING TO BUBBLE IT UP DOES
NOT ACTUALLY SEEM TO BE BORNE
OUT IN REALITY.
DO WE WANT TO GO OR DO WE WANT
TO TALK ABOUT FLUX RIGHT NOW OR
THIS ONE?
I MEAN I MEAN I MOVING TOWARDS
THAT YOU CAN YOU CAN SEE WHAT
MY INTENTION IS BUT WE'RE HAPPY
TO STAY WHERE MICHELLE HAS US.
I I I READ THE COMMENTS I I
MEAN I RESPECTFULLY I JUST
DISAGREE I DISAGREE WITH
STEPHANIE THERE ON THE ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT IN THE ZONES THAT
TRY TO TAMP DOWN ON HOUSING TO
RESTRICT HOUSING, TO PRESERVE
OTHER USES.
I JUST DON'T FIND ANY THEY
DON'T SEEM PERSUASIVE TO ME BUT
WE CAN GET INTO THAT WHEN WE
TALK ABOUT BUX
I LIKE THE I
LIKE THE FOURTH BULLET POINT A
LOT BURIED IN THIS IN ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT.
UM THAT THAT THE PLAN SHOULD
STAY AT THE CITY IS OPEN TO
USING INCENTIVES SUCH
AS TAX
ABATEMENTS FOR PROJECTS ALIGNED
WITH AN URBAN CORE ECONOMIC
STRENGTH AND THE REASON I LIKE
IT IS BECAUSE I THINK THAT WE
ARE EVOLVING OUT OF A MORE
LIMITED USE OF TAX INCREMENT
FINANCING.
WE ARE USED TO BE MORE LIMITED
AND WE ARE EVOLVING OUT
OF THAT.
AND I THINK A STATEMENT THAT
THAT THAT'S ACTUALLY A
COMMITMENT THAT WE HAVE RATHER
THAN JUST SORT OF LIKE OH YEAH,
WE STARTED TO DO THIS.
I THINK IT'S GREAT TO SORT
OF SAY THAT THAT'S REALLY
SOMETHING WE AFFIRM AND AND WE
WANT TO USE MORE BROADLY THEN
THAN IT HAD BEEN SO THAT THAT
FEELS GOOD.
>> I THINK WE'RE WE'RE GOING TO
ARGUE ABOUT THE THE POINT THAT
JUST CAME UP SO WE'LL JUST
ARGUE ABOUT UM AND I THINK
WE'VE HEARD FEEDBACK ABOUT THE
UNCLARITY OF THE FLECK'S
DISTRICT BEFORE AND SO I THINK
IT WOULD BE HELPFUL TO HAVE
SOME CLARIFICATION THAT I THINK
THERE WILL BE DISAGREEMENT AT
THIS TABLE IN TERMS OF WHAT IT
SHOULD OR SHOULD NOT INCLUDE
AND YOU KNOW, THAT'S OK.
WE'LL JUST ALL SAY WHAT WE WANT
TO SAY AND THEN MOVE ON THAT
THIS IS WHERE YOU CAN TAKE A
VOTE.
>> YEAH, THAT'S WHY I HAVE A
STAKE AS WELL.
>> WELL, FOR NOW WE'RE JUST
SHARING STUFF THAT WHEN WE GET
TO THAT PART OF THE PLAN WE CAN
BRING THESE BACK IN OR DISCUSS
IT THEN.
BUT I DID WANT TO I BELIEVE
EARLIER THERE WAS A REQUEST FOR
WHEN WE DO DIVERGE FROM STUFF
OPINION THAT YOU ARE MADE AWARE
OF THAT.
SO I WANTED TO LET YOU KNOW
ABOUT THAT.
UM, IF YOU SCROLL UP TO SYSTEMS
PLANNING, I GET THIS IS SORT
OF A POINT OF DIVERGING BUT I
THINK WE HAVE ALREADY ADDRESSED
SOME OF THIS.
THERE IS CONCERN THAT WE HAVE
NOT STATED CLEARLY ENOUGH THAT
WE'RE NOT PLANNING TO ROLL BACK
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTIONS AND
SO WE HAVE DISCUSSED THAT UM,
THERE IS A SECTION IN STRATEGY
TEN POINT ONE THAT INTRODUCING
MORE FLEXIBILITY TO SITE REVIEW
WILL HELP ENSURE ECOSYSTEM
BENEFITS AND DOESN'T SEEM LIKE
THEY'RE BUYING THAT THEY THINK
THAT MORE FLEXIBILITY COULD
DEGRADE NATURAL FEATURES RATHER
THAN PROTECT THEM.
SO THEY WANTED TO BRING THAT TO
OUR ATTENTION.
WHAT DO THEY MEAN BY AND WHAT
DO WE MEAN BY MORE FLEXIBILITY
TO SITE PLAN REVIEW?
>> I THINK I REMEMBER PART
OF THAT CONVERSATION BUT I
THINK IT WAS TRYING TO ACTUALLY
BRING NATURAL FEATURES TO THE
BEGINNING OF THE PROCESS.
RIGHT.
AND HAVING MORE FLEXIBILITY SO
THAT THOSE ARE SEEN AS A
PRIORITY AND BRINGING IT TO THE
FOREFRONT OF THEIR MIND WHEN
THEY'RE DEVELOPING.
IS THAT SOUND RIGHT?
RIGHT.
YEAH, I THINK THERE WAS ALSO A
BIT OF TIME CONVERSATION ABOUT
WHETHER OR NOT WE WERE
PROTECTING THE RIGHT THINGS
LIKE YOU MAY RECALL LIKE WITH
THE PACKAGE PROPERTY FOR
EXAMPLE, WE TALKED A LOT ABOUT
NOT ONLY THE LANDMARK TREES
THERE BUT ALSO LIKE SORT OF A
MAINTENANCE PLAN THAT WOULD
REALLY CULTIVATE THE NATURALIZE
AREA AROUND THOSE LANDMARK
AREAS.
SO I I INTERPRET THE
FLEXIBILITY A LITTLE LESS THAN
THE PROCESS RELATED STUFF BUT
MAYBE NATURAL FEATURES IS
REALLY CONSTRAINED ORDINANCES.
RIGHT?
WE DEFINE IT AND YOU'VE GOT TO
MITIGATE IT IF IT MEETS THESE
DEFINITIONS AND WE HEARD
PARTICULARLY FROM THE FOCUS
GROUP THAT NOT ALL TREES ARE
REALLY HAVE THE SAME ECOLOGICAL
VALUE.
SO THAT'S HOW I INTERPRET IT.
BUT TO BE CLEAR, THE PLAN
DOESN'T GET INTO MUCH MORE
DEFINITION OR GRANULARITY THAN
THAT.
IT DOESN'T SOUND LIKE
FLEXIBILITY IS THE RIGHT WORD
EXACTLY.
FOR WHAT YOU'RE DESCRIBING.
IF IT'S AN IDEA THAT NATURAL
FEATURES SHOULD BE BROUGHT TO
THE FOREFRONT OF THE DEVELOPERS
MIND EARLIER IN THE PROCESS,
THAT'S NOT THE SAME AS
FLEXIBILITY AND MEAN IF THERE
ARE THINGS THAT ARE KIND
OF RIGID AND THINGS THAT ARE
DESIRABLE BUT FALLING OUTSIDE
WHAT'S IN THE NATURAL FEATURES
THERE MIGHT BE A BETTER WAY
OF EXPRESSING THAT THEN
FLEXIBILITY BECAUSE WHEN I HEAR
FLEXIBILITY I THINK OH WE HAVE
STANDARDS BUT YOU KNOW, WE'LL
BURN THEM FOR YOU.
YOU KNOW?
AND SO I THINK THAT MIGHT BE
WHY THIS IS A SORT OF ANXIOUS
SOUNDING RESPONSE.
AND SO AGAIN, I JUST THINK IT'S
A PROBLEM OF MISUNDERSTAND WHAT
IT FELT LIKE AS I'M READING
THIS IN THE I'M READING DOWN A
COUPLE LINES TO THE OVER
DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS ALONE
LIKE IT'S EASY TO DESIGN TO THE
SETBACKS.
IT'S EASY TO SO THAT'S WHAT
THEY FOCUS ON RIGHT.
>> I HAVE TO MEET THOSE
SETBACKS WHERE AT LEAST THE WAY
THAT I TOOK THIS POTENTIALLY
AND MAYBE I'M JUST THINKING
OF OUR OLD PROJECT PLAN PROJECT
MODIFICATION WHERE YOU ACTUALLY
THERE WAS SOME FLEXIBILITY AND
THOSE INTENTIONAL SET BACK
STANDARDS IF IT MEANT
PRIORITIZE HOUSING REALLY GOOD
YOU KNOW, REALLY GOOD NATURAL
FEATURES AND SO THAT'S IF THAT
WAS THE INTENTION BEHIND THE
WAY THAT WAS WRITTEN.
I THINK THAT'S WHY I THINK
THAT'S GOOD ABOUT SO THEN IT
WOULD BE FLEXIBILITY IN THINGS
LIKE DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
WHERE BENEFICIAL PROTECTION
OF NATURAL FEATURES THAT AGAIN
SEEMS LIKE SOMETHING WE WOULD
NOT WANT TO PUT IN IF YOU KNOW
THAT DOESN'T SEEM LIKE YOU'D
WRITE THAT DOWN.
>> BUT YOU KNOW, I THINK I HAVE
A QUESTION BECAUSE IT IF I'M
CORRECT BECAUSE SMALLER PARCELS
ARE EXEMPT FROM SITE PLANT
REVIEW AND SITE PLAN REVIEW IS
THE MECHANISM THAT WE USE TO
PROTECT NATURAL FEATURES.
WE ARE EXEMPTING THIRTY SIX
PERCENT OF THE LAND FROM
PARTIZAN AIDING IN THE NATURAL
RESOURCES PRESERVATION I.E. A
SINGLE FAMILY HOMEOWNER CAN CUT
DOWN ALL THE TREES ON THEIR LOT
BECAUSE THEY DON'T HAVE TO
SUBMIT TO A SITE PLAN.
AND SO IF I READ THESE COMMENTS
CORRECTLY UNDER OUR SYSTEMS
PLANNING IT WOULD ACTUALLY BE A
MORE RESTRICTIVE SYSTEM THAT WE
WOULD BE IMAGINING BECAUSE WE
WOULD THEN SUBJUGATE ALL THIRTY
SIX PERCENT OF OUR ARE TO TO
SITE PLAN REVIEW AND THAT COULD
BE A MECHANISM FOR THIS
PRESERVATION ONE PATHUM OH WHY
WOULD WE DO THAT?
>> I'M NOT SUGGESTING THAT WE
DO THAT.
THAT IS MY POINT.
OH YOU'RE RIGHT.
I SEE YOU'RE READING THAT THAT
IS WHAT IS YEAH WELL BECAUSE
THE ONLY WAY WE THIS TABLE
SPEAKS TO THAT IS THROUGH SITE
PLANT REVIEW AND WE HAVE IN OUR
LAW BECAUSE WE PREFER THE UDC
PREFERS SINGLE FAMILY DETACHED
HOMES AS A SORT OF HOUSING TYPE
BECAUSE IT EXEMPTS IT FROM THIS
KIND OF CONTROL.
IT IS EXEMPTED FROM THIS KIND
OF PRESERVATION AND TO COME
TOWARDS STAFF IT WOULD HAVE TO
COME IN TO THAT KIND OF CONTROL
OR DO IT THROUGH SOMETHING
OTHER THAN ZONING.
WELL, WE WE WE CAN'T
REPREHENSIVE PLAN IS WE'RE MORE
THAN JUST ZONING.
I MEAN I THINK THAT'S ONE
OF THE THINGS RIGHT.
LIKE MAYBE I MEAN I IMAGINE
THAT MOST OF THE THINGS THAT WE
COME OUT OF THE IMPLEMENTATION
MATRIX ARE LIKE THIS IS WHAT
THE UDC NEEDS TO SAY BUT THERE
ARE SOME THINGS THAT WE'VE
ALREADY TALKED ABOUT,
PARTICULARLY IN ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT THAT ARE NOT US OR
INFRASTRUCTURE STUFF.
IT'S NOT ACTUALLY US.
AND SO THAT'S ONE WAY THAT YOU
CAN KIND OF SQUARE THAT.
SO WHAT IF FOR NOW WE DISCUSS
AMONG STAFF WHAT WE MEAN BY
FLEXIBILITY SO THAT CAN BE
CLEARER FOR THE NEXT ROUND?
YEAH, I MEAN I THINK IT'S A
GOOD QUESTION.
I'M WONDERING IF IT SHOULD BE
IT'S NOT SLIGHT FLEXIBILITY AND
SAY POINT REVIEW BUT IT MIGHT
BE FLEXIBILITY AND LAND
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
I THINK THAT'S KIND OF WHAT
WE'RE TALKING ABOUT IS THE LIKE
IF WE HAVE RIGID SET BACK
REQUIREMENTS FOR EXAMPLE THAT
ARE ROBUST AND THAT FORCES THE
DEVELOPMENT INTO A VERY A MORE
NARROW GEOGRAPHY OF THE SITE,
THEN A MORE FLEXIBLE FRAMEWORK
THAT MIGHT HAVE LESS DEMANDING
SIDE YARD SETBACKS OR REARGUARD
SETBACKS OR FRONTIER SETBACKS.
WE ARE ADDING TO THE POTENTIAL
THAT MAYBE THEY COULD WORK
AROUND A NATURAL RESOURCE.
ON THE FLIP SIDE WITHOUT THE
COMPANY, WITHOUT SOME OTHER
ACCOMPANYING FORM BASED
STANDARD WE MIGHT ALSO VERY
WELL JUST BE MANDATING A LARGER
BUILDING FOOTPRINT ON THAT SAME
LOT WITH THE SAME IMPACT AND
NATURAL SO THAT THAT MIGHT BE
ABLE TO SPEAK FOR THE STAFF
COMMENT BUT THAT MIGHT BE WHERE
IT'S COMING.
OK, UM CAN I MOVE?
I'M MOVING.
I STARTED AT THE BOTTOM AS
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT HAD THE
MOST WRITTEN BUT WE CAN
PROBABLY GO THROUGH PRETTY
QUICKLY.
SOLID WASTE IS JUST CONTINUING
TO ASK COULD THEY WANT TO BE
ABLE TO COORDINATE?
WELL IF WE ARE PERMITTING
HIGHER DENSITY HOW THEY CAN
OPERATIONALLY SERVE HIGHER
DENSITIES THERE'S NO REQUIRED
PARKING LOTS.
THEY WANT TO MAKE SURE THEY
UNDERSTAND WHERE THE DUMPSTERS
WILL GO AND HOW THEY CAN SERVE.
THIS I THINK COMES QUITE A BIT
IN CYCLING REVIEW.
SO THAT WAS ONE OF THEIR THEIR
QUESTIONS IT SEEMED WE HAD A
DEVELOPER IT'S THE DEVELOPER
CHURCH ROBINSON BROTHERS HAD AN
ISSUE WITH THIS BECAUSE THEY
WERE DOING A MULTIFAMILY
TOWNHOUSE DEVELOPMENT EXPECT TO
HAVE PARTS BUT THE CITY
REQUIRED A DUMPSTER AND THE
CITY PROHIBITS THE
DEVELOPER
FROM PICKING UP THE WASTE
THEMSELVES.
>> DOES THAT FIT IN HERE AT
ALL?
THIS IS SLIGHTLY DIFFERENT AS I
READ IT.
I THINK THAT WAS AN ISSUE AND
YES, IT WAS IMPORTANT.
YEAH, A BIG ISSUE BUT THIS ONE
SEEMS TO SAY I MEAN INCYTE PLAN
REVIEW PROVISION IS MADE FOR
DUMPSTER'S, CORRECT?
I MEAN AS IF YOU DON'T REVIEW
THINGS AND SAY OH WELL NO
PARKING I HOPE THAT I DON'T
KNOW THEY CAN DIG A BIG HOLE SO
THIS DOESN'T SEEM LIKE A WORRY
TO ME.
>> WE ALSO DON'T REQUIRE
PARKING NOW SO IT DOESN'T DRIVE
A NEW THING RIGHT?
I MEAN IT'S NOT YEAH.
I MEAN AND THINGS COME IN OFTEN
WITH PARKING BUT EVEN IF THEY
DON'T COME IN LIKE YOU KNOW,
THE THE BUILDING ON FOREST I'M
SURE THAT THERE WAS PROVISION
MADE FOR DUMPSTERS BECAUSE
STUDENTS LIVE THERE SO WELL
THEY NEED DUMPSTERS I CREATE WE
NEED DUMPSTERS.
YES WE DO BUT YEAH BUT YOU KNOW
YEAH THERE'S A LOT OF GRAFFITI
SO I PARTY MORE THAN REIDER.
THIS IS PROBABLY GETTING AT AS
WE EMBRACE A MORE URBAN FORM
PARTICULARLY SOLID WASTE
SERVICE CAN BE MORE CHALLENGING
AND FRANKLY THEIR TRADE OFFS WE
HAVE A PROJECT THAT'S ON THE
HORIZON FOR YOU THAT IN ORDER
TO ACCOMMODATE THE SERVICE FOR
AN URBANIZED ENVIRONMENT IT'S
GOING TO MANDATE BASICALLY
ROLLING DUMPSTERS OUT ONTO THE
PUBLIC SIDEWALK FOR A TIME
OF PICK THAT HAS A CONSEQUENCE
TO TRANSPORTATION, VISIBILITY
AND NON MOTORIZED MOTOR
FLEXIBILITY AND ADEQUACY.
SO I THINK THIS IS PROBABLY
GETTING TOWARDS AS A PATTERN
OF DEVELOPMENT GOES UP.
>> UM, IT'S NOT ALWAYS BUT IT'S
EASIER TO ACCOMMODATE A SOLID
WASTE IN A PARKING LOT AS WE
START PLANNING FOR A DIFFERENT
TYPOLOGY OF DEVELOPMENT.
I THINK IT'S JUST RECOGNIZING
THAT WE'RE GOING TO HAVE TO
FIGURE OUT WHAT TRADE OFFS ARE
WE COMFORTABLE LIVING WITH.
YOU KNOW, WHEN YOU THIS HAS
HAPPENED YOU'VE HEARD A LOT
OF CONVERSATIONS ABOUT TRASH
BINS AND BIKE LANES ACROSS THE
COMMUNITY.
THAT'S A GREAT EXAMPLE OF TRADE
OFFS.
RIGHT.
WE'VE GOT TO FIGURE OUT THE
WAYS THAT WE CAN'T ALWAYS WE
CAN ALWAYS SOLVE FOR
EVERYTHING.
ONE HUNDRED PERCENT SOMETIMES
MAKE OUT LITTLE PROGRESS IN ONE
REGARD IT'S GOING TO COMPROMISE
OUR PROGRESS AND ANOTHER.
SO I THINK THIS IS AGAIN I WANT
TO SPEAK TO A COMMENTER BUT
IT'S PROBABLY TALKING MORE SO
ABOUT WE'RE DEALING WITH MORE
AND MORE PROJECTS THAT DON'T
HAVE BIG SURFACE PARKING LOTS
THAT CAN CREATE A CHALLENGE FOR
US IN THESE TRADE OFFS.
>> WE HAD TO FIGURE OUT HOW WE
WANT TO ACCOUNT FOR IT IN TERMS
OF STAFFING VEHICLES.
RIGHT.
DO WE NEED DIFFERENT TYPES
OF VEHICLES?
THANK YOU THAT I WAS GOING SEE
MY POINT.
I THINK I THINK A LOT OF WHAT
I'M HEARING IS WE HAVE DECIDED
ON A TRYING TO MAKE THIS MORE
ABSTRACT BUT THE SORT OF TYPE
OF HOW WE ADDRESS THIS PROBLEM
.
SO AGAIN GOING ACTUALLY BACK TO
THE ROBINSON BROTHERS, THE FIRE
DEPARTMENT REQUIRED A SECOND
ENTRANCE BECAUSE OF THE SIZE
THE ENGINE AND THEN IT ALSO
REQUIRED THAT THEY PUT IN FIRE
SUPPRESSION AND ALL OF THE
UNITS WHICH INCREASE THE COST
BUT ALTERNATIVES THERE COULD
HAVE BEEN TO PUT A SUBSTATION
RIGHT THERE AND IT WOULD HAVE
PROBABLY BEEN ABOUT THE SAME
COST AND THEN BEEN ABLE TO
REACH MORE PEOPLE INSIDE.
BUT AS I WAS DOING THE MATH,
YOU KNOW, ONE OF THOSE ENGINES
IS LIKE ONE AND A HALF MILLION
DOLLARS SO THEY COULD HAVE JUST
KEPT IT ON THE SITE AND THEY
WOULDN'T HAVE HAD TO DEAL WITH
THAT.
SO HOW DO WE IN THE
COMPREHENSIVE LAND USE VISION
SIGNAL THAT WE ALSO NEED TO BE
INNOVATIVE AS THE CITY GROWS
THAT THE TOOLS AND RESOURCES WE
HAVE USED FOR THE PAST 50 YEARS
MAY NOT BE THE TOOLS AND
RESOURCES THAT WE USE FOR THE
NEXT 50 YEARS THAT
INFRASTRUCTURE COULD IMAGINE
EVEN SOMETHING LIKE SOLID WASTE
BEING IN TUBES UNDER
DEVELOPMENT THAT THEN GOES TO A
STATION AND IS PICKED UP THERE
AS OPPOSED TO IT'S COLLECTED IN
A BED AND A TRUCK COMES AND SO
FORTH.
SO I DON'T KNOW HOW WE CAPTURE
THAT LANGUAGE IN IN THE PLAN
BUT THAT'S INFRASTRUCTURE.
I MEAN IT'S NOT NECESSARILY YOU
KNOW, IT'S MOVING
INFRASTRUCTURE BUT I THINK IT'S
THINKING ABOUT HOW OUR
INFRASTRUCTURE GAPS AND SO WE
HAVE AN ADAPTIVE SIGNAL.
THANK YOU.
YOU ARE TEN FOR TEN TONIGHT.
CAN WE HAVE AN ADAPTIVE
APPROACH TO OUR INFRASTRUCTURE
TO MEET THE DENSITY GOALS THAT
WE HAVE AND THAT THAT MEANS WE
HAVE TO BE CREATIVE, WE HAVE TO
BE INNOVATIVE AND WE HAVE TO BE
WILLING TO LET GO OF THINGS
THAT HAVE WORKED HISTORICALLY
AND PIONEERED NEW THINGS SO IT
FEELS TO ME THAT THAT GOES BACK
UP INTO ONE OF OUR STRATEGIES
AND THIS IS BACK IN CHAPTER
FOUR.
RIGHT.
AND THAT'S WHAT I THANK YOU, BY
THE WAY FOR BRINGING ALL THIS
STUFF TOGETHER AND LIKE OH,
THERE ARE SOME COMMENTS THAT
ARE REALLY CHAPTER FOR COMMENT
THAT I'M NOT SURE HOW WHEN YOU
KNOW BUT WHERE WE TALK ABOUT
INFRASTRUCTURE AND AND GOALS
RELATED TO THAT, THAT'S WHERE I
WOULD PUT THAT ADAPTIVE
INDUSTRY FOR FUTURE.
SO THAT'S WHAT THIS QUESTION IS
IS RELATING TO.
AND I READ THIS AS LIKE A VERY
COLLABORATIVE QUESTION NOT AS
LIKE WELL HOW WOULD WE POSSIBLY
DO THIS?
HOW CAN WE HELP YOU GET TO YOUR
GOALS?
AND I THINK ALL AT WASIS
THERE'S DEFINITELY PLANNING FOR
ELECTRICITY.
YEAH.
AND I SAID IT'S MUCH LIKE FIRE
HAS BEEN PLANNING FOR IT AND
SOME OF SOME OF THAT IS
COLLEGIAL AND SOME OF IT IS
HEY, WE DON'T HAVE THE RIGHT
EQUIPMENT.
WE NEED MORE FROM COUNCIL TO
BUY THE RIGHT EQUIPMENT SO AND
THEY MIGHT BE IN THE SAME
SITUATION.
YEAH YEAH.
AND THAT THAT IS THE THERE IS
THE HOPE TO BE COLLEGIAL AND TO
BRING ALL THESE UNITS TOGETHER
AND HAVE THIS DISCUSSION BEFORE
WE NEED TO.
BUT SOMETIMES IT COMES DOWN TO
RESOURCES.
THERE'S NOT A LOT TO GO AROUND
AND IF WE'RE GOING TO DO THIS
THEN THIS DEPARTMENT IS GOING
TO SAY WE NEED MORE MONEY.
THAT DEPARTMENT IS GOING TO SAY
WE NEED MORE MONEY IF YOU WANT
TO DO X, Y, Z AND I THINK I
SAID A LOT OF THAT IN THIS
COMMENT AND LIKE OK, BUT PEOPLE
ARE GOING TO COMPLAIN IF WE DO
THIS AT 5:00 IN THE MORNING
PEOPLE ARE GOING TO COMPLAIN IF
WE DO THIS AT NOON, WHERE DO WE
DO IT?
IT'S CURRENTLY TWELVE LIKE
THAT'S WHERE THIS LIFTS AND I
THINK I I THINK THIS IS THE
GOOD CONVERSATION.
LIKE I WOULD JUST MAKE SURE
THAT WE IN OUR LIST BACK TO THE
THINGS I WOULD WORK IT INTO ONE
OF THOSE STRATEGIES AND GOAL
TWELVE WHICH I THINK
COMMISSIONER HAMMERSCHMIDT
SUGGESTED THAT WE LIKE TO
REMEMBER.
SO WHATEVER IT IS NOW OK, CAN I
GO TO TRANSPORTATION?
YOU MAY.
OK, THESE ARE JUST TO ROUGHLY
SUMMARIZE WE HAD A CONVERSATION
WITH THEM.
THEY JUST WANTED TO BE CLEAR
THAT OUR REFERENCES TO COMPLETE
STREETS IN THE DRAFT NEED A
LITTLE BIT MORE DESCRIPTION IN
THAT THERE'S A LOT OF THINGS
THAT ARE CONSIDERED A PART OF A
COMPLETE STREET LIKE LIGHTING
COULD BE ONE IF IT MAKES STREET
MORE WALKABLE BENCHES IT COULD
ALSO MEAN THINGS ROAD DIETS.
SO THEY WANTED TO JUST BE CLEAR
HERE THAT NOT EVERY STREET CAN
BE COMPLETE, THAT THERE ARE
TRADE OFFS JUST LIKE EVERYTHING
ELSE WITH DESIGN DEPENDING ON
RESOURCES AND RIGHT OF WAY WITH
AND ALL OF THAT.
SO THAT'S JUST SOME MORE
CLARIFYING LANGUAGE THERE ON
HOW THEY FEEL COMFORTABLE
TALKING ABOUT COMPLETE STREETS
AND IN THE SECOND BULLET POINT
IT'S JUST THEY WANTED US TO ADD
THEY'RE CURRENTLY DEVELOPING
SOME OR DOING SOME STUDIES FOR
SMALL TIME LANE ROADS THAT THEY
WANTED US TO ADD IN HERE AND
FOR US TO BE AWARE OF AND THAT
WE CAN COORDINATE MORE IN THE
FUTURE.
>> OK, UM, FROM THE DAY THEY I
THINK HAVE BEEN COMING TO
COUNCIL RECENTLY THEY ARE IN
THE MIDDLE OF THEIR DEVELOPMENT
PLAN.
THEY'RE CONSIDERING EXPANDING
THEIR BOUNDARIES AND
POTENTIALLY CHANGING THEIR
THEIR FUNDING STRUCTURE AND SO
THEY ADDED SOME COMMENTS IN
HERE JUST TO LET US KNOW TO
UPDATE THAT IN THE PLAN.
UM THAT THEY MIGHT NEED TO
REEVALUATE HOW THEY'RE DOING
THEIR GIVE BACK.
UM, OK.
AND THEN OFFICE
OF SUSTAINABILITY AND
INNOVATION.
THIS IS ANOTHER SLIGHT
DIVERGENCE ALTHOUGH NOT QUITE I
JUST LET YOU KNOW THEIR PLAN
CALLS FOR CIRCULAR ECONOMY.
WE'VE TALKED ABOUT THIS WHERE
THAT MIGHT REQUIRE SOME MESSIER
USES AND HAVE WE MADE SURE THAT
WE ARE ALLOWING FOR THOSE USES
WITHIN THE CITY AND THEY'RE
DOING SOME RESEARCH CURRENTLY
ON BUILDING HEIGHTS AND HOW
THAT WOULD AFFECT SOLAR SOLAR
PANELS ON YOUR NEIGHBOR.
I WANTED TO BRING UP BECAUSE
THIS WAS IN THE DRAFT HERE THAT
THERE'S A NEED FOR LARGE SCALE
SOLAR AND DR. AC STOLTZ HAS
PROJECTED THAT HERE ON THE
THIRD BULLET POINT THAT REALLY
FOCUSES ON SMALL SCALE
GENERATION AND DISTRIBUTION.
SO UM, WE RAISED THAT QUESTION
SO YEAH.
YEAH, AND THEN A CALL FOR USING
SOME OF THE LOCAL DATA ON THEIR
GREENHOUSE GAS INVENTORY THAT
PRIMARILY COMES FROM THE BUILT
ENVIRONMENT AND SHE PROVIDED A
LINK THERE SO I CAN INCLUDE
THAT IN THE PLAN.
>> UM, I THINK THOSE ARE THE
MAJOR THINGS THERE ARE SOME AT
THE BOTTOM THAT WE DIDN'T GET
FROM WE CAN TALK ABOUT AGAIN
WITH THE INFRASTRUCTURE MEMMO
OUR WASTE WASTEWATER RESOURCE
RECOVERY FACILITY JUST WANTED
US TO MAKE A CLEAR REFERENCE TO
HOW THERE IS PROJECTED TO BE
MORE FREQUENT AND HEAVY STORMS
AND WHAT IMPACT THAT WOULD HAVE
ON OUR FACILITY
.
>> UM, PROBABLY ALSO REVIEWED
OUR PLAN HAVE SOME SUGGESTIONS
THERE FOR TURNING PLYMOUTH AND
BROADWAY TO TRANSITION WHICH I
BELIEVE WE'VE DISCUSSED.
UM AND THEN PARKS AND REC JUST
HAD A QUESTION.
WE HAVE REFERENCES TO LOW AND
HIGH QUALITY PARKS.
UM, THEY'RE ASKING US MAYBE TO
FIND OUT WHAT'S REALLY EASY IF
IT'S JUST PATCHILY IT IT'S
PROBABLY NOT A HIGH QUALITY.
IT WAS SOME OF THEM ACTUALLY
HAVE BENCHES.
IT'S JUST UH WHAT IS THE ONE IN
MY NEIGHBORHOOD ON MAPLE?
IT'S JUST A CORNER AND THAT'S
WASN'T THAT A TERMINOLOGY THAT
WE'VE BEEN GIVEN THAT SOMETHING
IS A HIGHER QUALITY PART WHEN
WE APPROVED THE ONE OFF OF LIKE
MILLER AND MAPLE ARE YOU WELL
WITH THE HOUSING ADDITIONS LIKE
HIGHER QUALITY USE SO THAT THAT
FEELS A LITTLE FUNNY TO ME
BECAUSE I DON'T THINK WE
CREATED THAT TERMINOLOGY.
I THINK THAT TERMINOLOGY HAS
BEEN GIVEN TO US THAT WE
INHERITED IT RELATIVE TO PARKS
SO SO ASKING THEM BACK WHAT
LANGUAGE.
YES.
WAS THAT YOUR ONLY COMMENT
COMMISSIONER OR OTHER THERE WAS
ALSO THE OFFICE
OF SUSTAINABILITY AND
INNOVATION TEN POINT TO THE
FOURTH BULLET POINT IF ONLY
FOCUSED ON AREAS WITH EXISTING
FLOODING WILL BE ON OUR HEELS.
>> WHAT WAS THAT?
SO IN TEN POINT TO UH LET ME
SEE I HAVE TO PULL THAT UP.
UM, I THINK SHE'S JUST CALLING
FOR US TO BE MORE PROACTIVE
BECAUSE CURRENTLY WITH THE WAY
STORMS ARE HEAVIER AND MORE
FREQUENT THAT OUTSIDE OF FLOOD
PLAINS ARE FLOODING NOW AS
WELL.
AND SO THERE'S OFTEN A FOCUS ON
AREAS THAT WE KNOW WILL FLOOD.
BUT WITH THE PREDICTIONS THAT
WE THAT COME OUT OF AGENCIES
THAT MIGHT NOT EXIST FOR MUCH
LONGER THAT UH OTHER OTHER
PLACES ARE FLOODING FLOODING AS
WELL AND SO THAT WE MIGHT NEED
TO BE PAYING ATTENTION TO THIS.
IN ADDITION, IT LINKS TO THE
GOAL EIGHT WHICH WE TALK ABOUT
I THINK IN CHAPTER FIVE ABOUT
THE RESILIENCE WHERE WE HAD
THAT DISCUSSION ABOUT WHETHER
THAT'S A GOOD WORD OR NOT.
COMMISSIONER GORDON, I I JUST
WANT TO MAKE SURE I KNOW THAT
THE SUSTAINABILITY STAFF ARE
AWARE OF THIS, BUT I WANT TO
MAKE SURE THAT THE PLAN IS
REALLY CONSISTENTLY AWARE OR
MAKES CLEAR UM, WE'RE TALKING
ABOUT DENSIFYING A CITY THAT
NECESSARILY MEANS ADDING MORE
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE.
WE HAVE TO BE SURE THAT WE ARE
INCORPORATING GREEN
TECHNOLOGIES TO MANAGE THE
STORMWATER THAT'S GENERATED AS
MUCH AS POSSIBLE ON SITE AND
ALL OF THAT.
SO WE NEED TO KIND OF KEEP
DRIVING THAT HOME AND THAT
FEEDS TO THE SECOND POINT.
I WANT TO MAKE SURE THAT WE THE
PLAN KEEPS POINTING OUT IT'S
REALLY EASY TO SHOOT AT CITIES
FOR BEING THESE ENERGY HOGS AND
ALL OF THESE PROBLEMS IF YOU
JUST FOCUS ON THE CITY AND YOU
DON'T THINK ABOUT THE PEOPLE
THAT THE CITY IS SERVING AND
IGNORE THE FACT THAT IF THEY'RE
NOT LIVING HERE AND WE'RE WE'RE
ACCOMMODATING THEM EFFICIENTLY,
EFFICIENTLY AND EFFECTIVELY,
THEY'RE GOING TO BE LIVING
SOMEWHERE ELSE MUCH LESS
EFFICIENTLY AND MUCH MORE
DAMAGING TO THE ENVIRONMENT.
SO I'M A LITTLE BIT WORRIED IF
I JUST KIND OF PAINT A LITTLE
BIT ON WE SHOULD USE OUR
GREENHOUSE GAS INVENTORY AND
FOCUS ON THE BUILT ENVIRONMENT
AND POINT OUT HOW BAD THE
ENVIRONMENT IS.
BUT IF YOU DO THAT IN ISOLATION
OF THE PERCOCET PER PER CAPITA
USE OF ENERGY AND DEVELOPMENT
PATTERNS, YOU GET A DISTORTED
PICTURE.
SO AM I MAKING SENSE?
YEAH, INDIC THAT MIGHT ACTUALLY
SORRY PROFESSOR RECRIMINATORY
IT'S MY BEDTIME.
IT MIGHT BE A REFERENCE BECAUSE
A COUPLE OF YEARS AGO WE HAD A
GRAD STUDENT WORK WITH OWI ON A
CALCULATOR THAT EFFECTIVELY
SHOWED JUST THAT UNITS BUILT IN
THE CITY IT WAS A GREENHOUSE
GAS CALCULATOR, UNITS BUILT IN
THE CITY THAN EVER BECAUSE THEY
TEND TO BE SMALLER BECAUSE THEY
TEND TO BE ATTACHED BECAUSE YOU
CAN CUT DOWN ON COMMUTING.
YOU CAN ALSO CUT DOWN ON, YOU
KNOW, RUNNING ERRANDS, THE
EMISSIONS ASSOCIATED WITH THAT
EVEN IF THEY'RE NOT ZERO LIKE
THEY ARE, THEY PRODUCE FEWER
GREENHOUSE GASES THAN WHAT
WOULD BE THE ALTERNATIVE IF
PEOPLE WEREN'T LIVING IN THE
CITY.
EXACTLY.
SO WE'VE BEEN BECAUSE I THINK
THAT THAT'S SOMETHING COME UP
HERE AND IT OUGHT TO COME UP
HERE AND WE'RE WE'RE DUSTING
THAT OFF AND HOPEFULLY WE'LL BE
ABLE TO PUBLISH THAT IN AS IT
LIKE A FACT SHEET IN THE
CALCULATOR IN A MONTH OR TWO.
SO SO MY POINT IS PLEASE AS WE
CRITIQUE THE WAY WE'RE BUILDING
INTERNALLY, MAKING SURE WE'RE
DOING IT AS WELL AS WE CAN, WE
ALSO PUT IT IN THE CONTEXT
OF THE LARGER REGIONAL IMPACTS
OF DIFFERENT DEVELOPMENT
PATTERNS IF YOU WANT TO BE
GREEN IN A LOT OF WAYS LIVE IN
A CITY IT'S A MUCH MORE ENERGY
EFFICIENT AND LESS POLLUTING
WAY TO LIVE THAN EVERYBODY
SPRAWLING OUT OVER THE
COUNTRYSIDE.
>> RIGHT.
DID YOU GET WHAT YOU NEEDED?
YES.
SO NOW THESE ARE THE THESE ARE
THE MAJORITY OF THE COMMENTS
THAT WE WILL BE COMPILING WITH
YOURS TO GO THROUGH THE FIRST
ROUND OF EDITS.
OK, CAN I JUST ASK ONE SMALL
THING ABOUT THE EIGHTY EIGHT
PART IT THEY IDENTIFY THE GAP
BETWEEN MIRFIN AND MAYDAN IS
THAT I THINK THAT'S BEFORE WHEN
WE WERE ZONING TAKE ONE AS WELL
IS IS THAT THE GAP THAT WE WANT
TO KEEP THERE?
IS IT BECAUSE THERE'S A LOT
OF UNIVERSITY PROPERTY THERE?
>> I'D HAVE TO LOOK
SPECIFICALLY AT THE MAP.
I THINK IN GENERAL MY
RECOLLECTION OF A WHITE
PLYMOUTH IS NOT TRANSITION IS
WELL AT LEAST ON BROADWAY
THERE'S A HISTORIC DISTRICT AND
THERE'S ALSO LIKE A MASSIVE
GRAVE THAT MAKES IT DIFFICULT
TO DEVELOP.
SO I THINK WE DIDN'T ANTICIPATE
THAT THAT WOULD AN AREA WHERE
THERE WOULD BE A TON
OF DEVELOPMENT FOR THE BUS
ROUTE THAT'S TOTALLY FINE.
>> THAT'S A GOOD REASON.
>> OK, ALL RIGHT.
>> CAN WE TALK ABOUT THE FLUX
DISTRICT AND A FEW OTHER THINGS
STILL IN THEIR COMMUNICATION?
OK, I HAD SOME EDITS OR
CORRECTIONS TO THE CHAPTER FIVE
NOTES THAT WERE IN THE PACKET
FROM LAST WEEK OH FIVE AND I
JUST I DIDN'T WANT TO GET ON
THE NEW STUFF WITHOUT TOUCHING
THAT STUFF RIGHT.
WHERE WERE YOU GOING NEXT
BECAUSE I THOUGHT THOSE WERE
THE THREE THINGS THAT WE WERE
GOING TO DISCUSS THE HOUSING,
THE INFRASTRUCTURE AND THE
STAFF COMMENTS.
SO OK, SO I THINK WE CAN GO
BACK TO CHAPTER FIVE.
IS THAT OK?
SO THERE WERE I WAS GOING BACK
THROUGH THE STAFF COMPILATIONS
OF ALL THE FEEDBACK FROM LAST
SESSION AND THERE WERE JUST A
COUPLE OF CLARIFICATIONS AND
MAYBE A CORRECTION THAT I
WANTED TO MAKE SO THERE'S A
THERE'S AN END QUOTE ZONING
SHOULD BE PRIMARY SOURCE FOR
RECOMMENDING LAND USE
DISTRICTS.
I THINK THAT'S RIGHT.
IT'S PRETTY IT'S A HIGHER LEVEL
THAN I THINK WE GOT WITH A LOT
OF CONVERSATION ABOUT WHAT I
HEARD AND I WANT TO I WANT TO
ONLY FOCUS ON WHAT I THOUGHT I
HEARD YOUR SUPPORT FOR IN TERMS
OF THE LIKE WE CALL THEM THE
RULES, RIGHT.
THE WAY THAT THE MALPAS
PREPARED I HAD SUPPORT FOR THE
AR ONE OR TWO VERSUS OUR THREE
OUR FOUR RULES THAT STAFF AND
THE CONSULTING TEAM USED AS A
GUIDE THE LOW RISE AND
TRANSITION ZONES ON THE DRAFT
LAND USE MAP.
I HEARD GENERAL SUPPORT FOR
DEVIATIONS FROM THOSE RULES TO
RECOMMEND HIGHER DENSITY LEVELS
THEN THOSE RULES WOULD
OTHERWISE RECOMMEND STAFF YOU'D
HIGHER DENSITY AS APPROPRIATE
BASED ON CHARACTERISTICS
SPECIFIC TO AN AREA AND I HEARD
GENERAL OPPOSITION DEVIATIONS
TO RECOMMEND A LOWER DENSITY
THAN THOSE RULES BUT OTHERWISE
RECOMMEND.
THAT'S WHAT I THOUGHT I HEARD.
THAT'S A LITTLE BIT MORE THAN
YOU BUILD OUT IN YOUR COMMENT
BUT I DIDN'T WANT SOMEONE THAT
WANTS TO GET LOST BECAUSE THE
ZONING SHOULD BE A PRIMARY
SOURCE FOR RECOMMENDING LAND
USE DISTRICTS IS SORT OF AN
AUTOMATIC REVERSION TO WHATEVER
IS CURRENTLY IN THE ZONING MAP
AND THAT MISSES THAT NUANCE
OF FOR EXAMPLE, THE MILLER THE
MILLER DECISION TO GO UP FROM
WHERE WE ARE IN THE CURRENT
MAP.
THAT SEEMS LIKE A DECISION
STAFF MADE FOR A SET OF REASONS
FEEL DEFENDED BY SOUND LOGIC
AND EVIDENCE AND EXPERIENCE AND
I DIDN'T WANT TO DISTURB THAT
OR SUGGEST THAT WE WANTED TO
DISTURB RIGHT NOW IT WASN'T
SOMETHING WE TOUCHED THE
DECLARED FOR THE CONNECTION I
WANTED TO MAKE.
I THERE WAS A THERE'S AN EDIT
ON ONE ON ONE OLD FOURTH WALL.
AN OLD ONE SIDE SHOULD BE
TRANSITION DISTRICT.
I DIDN'T PERSONALLY WANT TO
TOUCH ANY CHOICES YOU MADE IN
THE OLD WEST SIDE.
MY COMMENTS DURING THE MEETING
WERE VERY FOCUSED TARGETED ON
THE OLD FOURTH AND I ACTUALLY
THOUGHT THE WAY THAT THE MAP
HANDLED THE OLD WEST SIDE WAS
WELL DONE BUT THAT'S A PRETTY
MESSY BOUNDARY AND THERE
THERE'S D THERE'S THE PARKLAND,
THERE'S THE HURON TRANSITION
CORRIDOR THAT'S BEING ADDED.
>> SO I DIDN'T WANT TO TOUCH I
DON'T WANT TO TOUCH SIDE THEN I
WANT TO MAKE SURE I DIDN'T MISS
ANYTHING HERE ONCE I I ALSO
WANT TO PROPOSE LANGUAGE TO
REPLACE ON PAGE ONE OF NINE WE
STRUCK NO LIMIT ON NUMBER
OF HOMES WHICH IS A BULLET ON
ONE OH NINE AND I WAS HALF
TASKED WITH PROPOSING LANGUAGE
TO SUBSTITUTE FOR THAT.
THE LANGUAGE THAT I WOULD
PROPOSE FOR THAT IS SCALE AND
DENSITY TO BE REGULATED BY FORM
AND OR DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS
AS WELL AS APPROPRIATE TO THE
IDEA HERE BEING WE'RE NOT WE'RE
STRIKING NO LIMIT ON NUMBER
OF HOMES BUT THERE'S A CONCEPT
WE WANT TO THERE IS GOING TO BE
SOME LIMIT ON SCALE AND DENSITY
IN LOW RISE RESIDENTIAL FOR
BEING NON PRESCRIPTIVE ON THAT
EXCEPT WE'RE NOT ENDORSING A
UNIT BASED RESTRICTION.
THAT IS WHAT I THOUGHT WE WERE
WITHIN NO UNIT
LIMIT
CONSTRUCTION TO BEGIN WITH AND
I THINK THAT'S A LITTLE BIT
MORE CLEAR TO THE PUBLIC.
I'M GOING TO STOP THERE.
I WELL I WAS TO JUMP IN THAT AS
WE'RE GOING BACK TO CHAPTER
FIVE TO HOMEWORK THAT I AGREE
WITH THAT THE HOMEWORK THAT I
TOOK UPON MYSELF WAS TO WALK
THROUGH THE OLD WEST SIDE WHICH
I DO ALL THE TIME ANYWAY.
BUT PAY ATTENTION TO APARTMENT
BUILDINGS BECAUSE I THIS HAS TO
DO WITH THE GRAPHICS AND SOME
OF THE PICTURES BUT LIKE WHAT
IS SMALL APARTMENT BUILDING TO
GET AT THIS LIKE IN TERMS
OF FORM AND FUNCTION AND HOW
MUCH OF IT IS NUMBER OF UNITS.
SO IN THE PACKET WILL SEE
TWELVE EXAMPLES ALL FROM ALMOST
ALL FROM AT LEAST MY SET
OF ARRANGED IN INCREASING ORDER
OF THE FOOTPRINT BECAUSE
ACTUALLY AS I WON'T TELL YOU
WHERE I DRAW THE LINE I MEAN I
CAN I THINK IT'S A LOT WE NEED
TO THINK ABOUT WHERE WE DRAW
THE LINE IN TERMS OF WHAT WE'RE
SHOWING FOR SMALL APARTMENT
BUILDING VERSUS MEDIUM
APARTMENT BUILDING IN MY MIND
KIND OF WHAT A GROUND FLOOR
SQUARE FOOTAGE WAS OFTEN
DICTATED HOW I THOUGHT ABOUT IT
IN IN CONTEXT BUT ALSO ITS
ORIENTATION TO THE ROAD.
SO THIS IS WHERE LIKE THINKING
ABOUT THE FORM BASED THING I
THINK IS REALLY IMPORTANT BUT
IN CASE IT'S HELPFUL YOU CAN
SEE I PULLED THE NUMBER
OF UNITS FROM THE ASSESSOR'S
DATABASE AND THE INFORMATION
THAT THEY HAD ON THEIR OVERALL
SQUARE FOOTAGE THEY DIDN'T
NECESSARILY TALK ABOUT THE
GROUND FLOOR AND SO I HAD TO DO
SOME CALCULATIONS.
I WOULD SAY UNITS REALLY ARE A
LOUSY WAY OF REGULATING THINGS
BECAUSE YOU HAVE SOME THAT ARE
VERY CLEARLY VERY LARGE.
YOU KNOW OUR SIX BEDROOM UNITS
CAN TAKE UP THE SAME SPACES AS
SIX BEDROOMS OR SIX STUDIO SO
ANYWAY, IN CASE THAT'S HELPFUL
FOR YOU, IT MADE ME FEEL BETTER
TO UNDERSTAND TO TRY TO PUT
SOME THOUGHT BEHIND WHAT I WAS
SEEING OR EXPERIENCING AS I'M
WALKING LIKE THEY'RE ALL
EVERYTHING THAT I PAINT IS
EITHER TWO OR THREE STORIES.
YOU ALMOST GOT MY HOUSE.
I KNOW I ALMOST GOT YOUR WHAT
WOULD IT BE HELPFUL TO SEND YOU
LIKE THE TWO THINGS I READ I
READ SOME SPECIFIC LANGUAGE.
I'LL JUST WANT TO SEE HOW WELL
I SAID SOMETHING THAT WE NEED
TO TAKE A VOTE ON.
HAPPY TO.
DOES ANYBODY HAVE ANY
OBJECTIONS TO WHAT I READ?
OH I DON'T THINK SO.
I THINK WE I THINK THAT WAS
JUST SO PERFECTLY
COLLABORATION'S SCRIPTWRITER'S
NOTES AS THEY WERE.
>> I HAD A COUPLE OF THINGS IF
I I JUST NEED TO LOCATE MYSELF
AND TIME AND SPACE ARE WE IN
CHAPTER FIVE?
>> ARE WE JUST STILL DOING
CORRECTIONS COME THROUGH THIS
MEMO OF THAT.
>> YEAH.
SO DOES ANYONE ELSE HAVE
CORRECTIONS FROM THE MEMO?
>> I JUST WANT TO KNOW JUST TO
UNDERSTAND OK GO ON IN THE VERY
OPENING OF THE MEMO YOU ASK IN
CHAPTER ONE IF WE WANT OTHER
SIGNIFICANT DATA AND YOU ASK
WHAT ABOUT PAGES 14 TO 18?
AND I THINK IT WOULD BE HELPFUL
IT MIGHT BE HELPFUL THERE OR IT
MIGHT BE HELPFUL ON PAGE FORTY
EIGHT WHERE WE'RE TALKING ABOUT
RATE OF GROWTH AND PLATEAUING
IT MIGHT BE HELPFUL TO PUT SOME
REFERENCE TO THE HOUSEHOLD
FORMATION FACTS THERE BECAUSE
CORRELATES TO DEMAND FOR
HOUSING AND BECAUSE PEOPLE ARE
RELYING SOLELY ON POPULATION
GROWTH AND THEIR SORT
OF IMPLYING THAT WE DON'T THIS
IS THE POPULATION IS NOT
GROWING.
WE WE ARE GOING TO BE
OVERBUILDING BUT WE KNOW THAT
HOUSEHOLD FORMATION IS GROWING
AND THAT THAT'S IN IT THAT'S A
PRESENT DEMAND FOR HOUSING.
I DON'T KNOW IF YOU THINK
THAT'S IF YOU THINK THAT THAT'S
SIGNIFICANT IF IT'S OTHER
SIGNIFICANT DATA IN YOUR MIND
THEN PAGE FOURTEEN AND OR PAGE
FORTY EIGHT WHERE WE'RE
CLARIFYING THE ENORMOUS GROWTH
HAS PLATEAUED.
QUESTION AND THEN PAGE THIRTY
SIX THERE'S THE REFERENCE TO
TALKING ABOUT THE GREENBELT AND
SHOULD WE TALK ABOUT HOW IT
CONSTRAINS.
I WOULD NOT I MEAN THE WAY I
SEE IT YEAH IT DOES MEAN IT
MAKES US HAVE TO BUILD UP BUT
IT'S THE WAY I THOUGHT THAT
AND IF WE'RE CALLING MICHELLE
MICHELLE I'M CALLING ALL OF YOU
BY WHATEVER FIRST NAME I FEEL
LIKE YOU ARE FIND THE I THINK
WHAT SAID LAST WEEK WAS A
REALLY GOOD IT WAS A REALLY
GOOD EXPLANATION OF HOW THE
GREENBELT IS PART OF A HOLISTIC
SYSTEM THAT IS LOOKING OUT FOR
NATURAL FEATURES AND THAT SO WE
CAN BUILD WHERE IT'S
APPROPRIATE AND YEAH, WE'RE
GOING TO LOSE SOME AND WE'RE
GOING TO GET SOME MORE PERVIOUS
IMPERVIOUS PAVEMENT.
BUT WE'VE MADE A GREENBELT
PROTECTION AND SO THAT'S THAT'S
ONE WAY THAT WE'RE REDUCING
CARBON EMISSIONS BECAUSE WE'RE
SAVING A LOT OF OPEN LAND WHERE
THE OPEN LAND CAN DO GOOD
BECAUSE THINGS CAN BE FARMED ON
WHICH SO I DON'T KNOW IF YOU
LOOKED BACK AT THE MEETING, DID
YOU REMEMBER WHAT TIME IT WAS
THAT YOU SAID THAT LAST BECAUSE
OF THE 1923 I THOUGHT IT WAS
WELL EXPLAINED AND YEAH.
WELL IT'S EASY TO SEARCH THE
TRANSCRIPT BECAUSE THAT WAS A
LONG CONVERSATION AROUND
NATURAL RESOURCES AND I NOT A
REPUDIATION OF GRASS.
I WAS A NATURAL RESOURCE AND
OPEN SPACE SO THAT COULD BE A
KEY WORD FOR WHOEVER IS HELPING
WITH THAT COMMISSIONER.
OH, OK.
ALL RIGHT.
CAN WE GO TO TOP FIVE?
LET'S START WE WANT TO START
ALL RIGHT.
WITH THE FLUX DISTRICT IS THERE
LET'S START WE WANT TO START
I MEAN CAN WE START THERE?
WITH THE FLUX DISTRICT IS THERE
DID YOU KNOW I WAS THINKING IF
I MEAN CAN WE START THERE?
WE STARTED WITH GENERAL
DID YOU KNOW I WAS THINKING IF
AGREEMENT TO GET RID OF IT THEN
WE STARTED WITH GENERAL
THE OTHER TWO WE CAN HAVE A
AGREEMENT TO GET RID OF IT THEN
LONGER CONVERSATION ABOUT.
THE OTHER TWO WE CAN HAVE A
BUT IF WE FEEL LIKE WE WANT TO
LONGER CONVERSATION ABOUT.
START ONE AFTER ANOTHER I'M
BUT IF WE FEEL LIKE WE WANT TO
HAPPY TO DO THAT.
START ONE AFTER ANOTHER I'M
BUT I FEEL LIKE THE TABLE HAS
HAPPY TO DO THAT.
BEEN CONSISTENT IN ITS DISDAIN
BUT I FEEL LIKE THE TABLE HAS
FOR FLEX DISTRICT.
BEEN CONSISTENT IN ITS DISDAIN
BUT I COULD BE READING THE
FOR FLEX DISTRICT.
TABLE INCORRECTLY AND WITH THE
BUT I COULD BE READING THE
EXCEPTION OF COUNCIL MEMBER I'M
TABLE INCORRECTLY AND WITH THE
GOING TO TAKE A RUN OUT OF IF
EXCEPTION OF COUNCIL MEMBER I'M
YOU'LL GIVE ME OH I'M HAPPY TO
GOING TO TAKE A RUN OUT OF IF
GIVE YOU ONE WAY OR MAYBE WE
YOU'LL GIVE ME OH I'M HAPPY TO
HAVE TO STRIKE IT.
GIVE YOU ONE WAY OR MAYBE WE
>> I I THINK SO.
HAVE TO STRIKE IT.
FLEX RELUCTANTLY TOLERATES
>> I I THINK SO.
RESIDENTIAL I EXPECT ZONING
FLEX RELUCTANTLY TOLERATES
THAT IS PRODUCED BY US DISTRICT
RESIDENTIAL I EXPECT ZONING
WILL BE RESTRICTIVE OF HOUSING
THAT IS PRODUCED BY US DISTRICT
MORE THAN IT IS RESTRICTED IN
WILL BE RESTRICTIVE OF HOUSING
TRANSITION.
MORE THAN IT IS RESTRICTED IN
SO I WANT TO TREAT IT THAT WAY.
TRANSITION.
THAT'S THE INTENTION OF THE
SO I WANT TO TREAT IT THAT WAY.
DISTRICT.
THAT'S THE INTENTION OF THE
THAT'S WHAT IT SET OUT SETS OUT
DISTRICT.
TO DO.
THAT'S WHAT IT SET OUT SETS OUT
I THINK THAT'S WHAT IT'S GOING
TO DO.
I THINK THAT I UNDERSTAND THE
SUPPORT FOR THE DISTRICT COMING
FROM I UNDERSTAND THE COMMENTS
MADE BY THE ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT OFFICE.
I RESPECT THEIR OPINION.
I'VE READ THEIR COMMENTS.
I JUST DON'T THINK THAT THOSE
ARGUMENTS ARE SUPPORTED AS THIS
HAS BEEN A LIVE ISSUE SINCE
JANUARY WHEN WE FIRST DISCUSSED
DISCUSSED THE TOPIC OF ZONES
THAT RESTRICT OR PROHIBIT
HOUSING, I KEPT ASKING MYSELF
DO WE HAVE EVIDENCE THAT
RESIDENTIAL IS ACTUALLY
CROWDING OUT OTHER USES IN OUR
CURRENT MIXED USE ONS?
I AM NOT AWARE OF THAT DYNAMIC
OR EVIDENCE OF THAT HAPPENING
AT A SCALE THAT WE SHOULD BE
CONCERNED ABOUT.
MY EXPECTATION CONSISTENT WITH
MY COMMENTS THE LAST TWO
MEETINGS IS THAT CHANGES IN
THESE DISTRICTS WILL BE
INCREMENTAL.
THEY'RE GOING TO BE BUFFERED BY
EXISTING PROPERTY RIGHTS,
EXISTING LEASE TERMS GOING
CONCERN BUSINESS OPERATIONS
LOOKING TO REMAIN IN THEIR
LEASES TO THE END OF THOSE
TERMS OR TO DECLINE OFFERS TO
SELL AND RELOCATE IF THEY OWN
THE PROPERTY.
IF THOSE INCREMENTAL CHANGES
OCCUR AND SOME OF THOSE
BUSINESSES RELOCATE OR ARE
DISPLACED, WE SHOULD WELCOME
THAT CHANGE WE HAVE WE'VE READ
THE PUBLIC COMMENT THAT WAS
SUBMITTED A COUPLE OF WEEKS
BACK COMPARING THE TAX REVENUE
GENERATED BY THE GEORGE A
SINGLE SINGLE BUILDING WHICH
GENERATES MORE REVENUE FOR THE
CITY THAN ALL FORTY TWO PARCELS
ALONG SOUTH INDUSTRIAL
COMBINED.
AND THAT'S NOT TO MINIMIZE THE
VALUE OF THOSE BUSINESSES THAT
SIT ON THOSE PARCELS.
TAX REVENUES OBVIOUSLY NOT THE
END OF THE ANALYSIS BUT IT
SHARPENS THE POINT OF HOW
CONSEQUENTIAL IT WOULD BE TO
USE THE LAW TO RESIST PROJECTS
LIKE THIS FROM BEING
CONSTRUCTED IN THIS OR ANY
SECTION OF THE CITY.
I JUST DON'T THINK WE CAN BASE
POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS THAT
CONSEQUENCE ON A HUNCH ABOUT A
FUTURE ECONOMIC USE THAT WE MAY
NOT NEED.
I DON'T I THINK BUDGETS ARE
MORAL DOCUMENTS.
I THINK THAT CHOOSING TO
PREEMPT OR BLOCK THE HIGHER
VALUE, MORE BADLY NEEDED
RESOURCE WILL HAVE HUMAN
CONSEQUENCES FOR THE PEOPLE WHO
LIVE HERE AND WHO COULD LIVE
HERE.
ADDITIONALLY, WE HAVE CURRENT
AND ONE IN TWO DISTRICTS THAT
DO WHAT THE ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT OFFICE WANTS FOLKS
TO DO WHICH IS PRESERVE AREAS
AGAINST HOUSING DEVELOPMENT FOR
ECONOMIC USES.
THEY ARE A TEST CASE FOR THE
CLAIM THAT THESE DISTRICTS ARE
NEEDED TO CAPTURE HIGH QUALITY
STEM STARTUPS THROWN OFF BY THE
UNIVERSITY AND OTHER
ACTIVITIES.
AND WHAT ARE WE GETTING FOR
THAT HOUSING CHOICE?
WE ARE GETTING A DOWNTOWN
DISTRICT THAT REMAINS THE MOST
IMPORTANT ECONOMIC JOB CENTER
IN THE CITY.
WE DO NOT HAVE TECH COMPANIES
AND OTHER UNIVERSITY SPINOFFS
LANDING IN THE SECTIONS OF THE
CITY THAT WE ARE PROTECTING
FROM HOUSING AND PROJECTED TO
HAVE ZONED AS THIS FLUX
DISTRICT THAT IS NOT THE
INDUSTRIAL COMPOSITION SELF
INDUSTRIAL AND MAIN STREET.
WE HAVE POLLUTION SHOPS AND ALL
KINDS HARDWARE STORES AND
OFFICE BUILDINGS AND THESE ARE
ALL GREAT SMALL BUSINESSES
WALKING INSIDE CITY LIMITS BUT
I THINK WE WILL HAVE THEM
INSIDE CITY LIMITS IF WE ZONE
TO TRANSITION BECAUSE WE HAVE
THEM THERE NOT WE HAVE NO
REASON TO EXPECT THE TRANSITION
TO CAUSE THAT KIND
OF DISPLACEMENT.
THAT'S NOT HOW IT'S WORKED IN
THE DISTRICTS THAT HAVE MIXED
USE TODAY.
I DON'T THINK THEY'RE BETTER
OFF IF WE RESTRICT THEIR
ABILITY TO MAKE A BUSINESS
DECISION TO SELL OR RELOCATE,
ESPECIALLY IF THEY OWN A REAL
ESTATE TO THOSE BUSINESS OWNERS
THAT SAYING WE KNOW WHAT'S BEST
FOR YOU AND I DON'T KNOW WHY WE
WOULD DO THAT IF A DEVELOPER
WANTS TO PURCHASE ONE OF THESE
PROPOSALS TO BUILD HOUSING,
BUILD A NEW PROJECT ON ONE
OF THESE CORRIDORS, ONE WITH
COURAGE THAT WE KNOW FROM
RECENT PROJECTS HOW VALUABLE
THAT PROJECT WILL BE FOR THE
CITY'S TAX BASE, CLIMATE GOALS
AND A MYRIAD OF OTHER CITY
POLICIES.
AND I THINK THE LAW SHOULD BE
EXTRAORDINARILY RELUCTANT TO
STAND IN THE WAY THAT
OPPORTUNITY AND CREATE WHAT
WILL BE ENORMOUS OPPORTUNITY
COST THE CITY AND FOR RESIDENTS
AGAIN I'M GOING TO BE PERSUADED
ON THIS BUT I'M NOT SEEING THE
EVIDENCE THAT SUPPORTS CREATING
THIS ENTIRE DISTRICT TO DO THIS
THING TO TRY TO CHASE THESE
HYPOTHETICAL BENEFITS THAT'S
JUST NOT SEEN PLAY OUT IN THE
DISTRICTS THAT WE ALREADY HAVE
IN THE FIELD THAT DO IT FLEX
ALREADY THAT FOX WOULD DO BUT
LY MORE SO.
BUT THE MOST COMPELLING DATA IS
WE HAVE OFFERS IN FLEX VACANCY
RATES THAT ARE STUCK AT
FOURTEEN FIFTEEN PERCENT.
SO WE HAVE ROOM IN OUR CITY
TODAY WITHOUT THESE TYPES
OF LEGAL RESTRICTIONS FOR
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND
OPPORTUNITY AND WE DON'T NEED A
LAW TO PROTECT IT.
WE HAVE A RENTAL VACANCY RATE
THAT THE LAW IS ARTIFICIALLY
CONSTRAINING IT NEAR NEAR OR
FUNCTIONALLY ZERO.
I JUST DON'T KNOW NUISANCE.
THAT'S NOT A JUSTIFICATION
EITHER AND I WANTED THEM TO
ALONG WITH IN ITSELF INDUSTRIAL
ROCKETS AT RESIDENTIAL LINING
LINING THEIR BORDERS.
IF WE'RE NOT PROTECTING
NUISANCE THERE TODAY AND WE
DON'T NEED THIS FLECK'S
DISTRICT TO DO THAT TRANSITION
WILL PERMIT LIGHT INDUSTRIAL
USES.
ALL OF THESE AREAS WILL HAVE
THEIR CURRENT USES PROTECTED
AND THAT'S AN IDEAL OUTCOME
THAT ALLOWS HOUSING CONSISTENT
WITH THE LAND'S AFFORDABILITY,
AFFORDABILITY AND SUSTAINABLE
AND SUSTAINABILITY GOALS ALONG
WITH A LOT OF FEEDBACK.
>> ALL RIGHT.
WELL, COMMISSIONER MANDELSON
WELL, YEAH, I WAS HERE IN
JANUARY WHEN YOU GUYS TALKED
ABOUT THIS SO I WILL BE ALSO I
THINK THAT WE NEED TO KEEP THIS
DISTRICT IN PART I THINK A VERY
SMALL AMOUNT OF THE LAND AREA
AND I WHAT I WORRY ABOUT IS
THIS IS WHERE WE HAVE A LARGE
LOTS WE DON'T HAVE ANY OF THE
PLACES THAT WE USED TO HAVE
THAT WOULD BE PRIME OR BIG KIND
OF DEVELOPMENT HAVE ALREADY
BEEN TAKEN.
WE KNOW THIS THIS IS WHAT'S
LEFT AND SO WHAT I WORRY ABOUT
TO THE POINT OF LIKE YEAH, WE
HAVE LOTS OF MIXED USE
DISTRICTS RIGHT NOW.
WE DON'T GET A LOT OF THEM ARE
SMALL AND FOR SOME OF THESE
MESSY, SMELLY, WHATEVER KIND
OF LAND USES LIKE THAT WE GOT
IN YOU KNOW BUT WHAT WE'RE
HEARING FROM BOTH THE
SUSTAINABILITY STAFF AND
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT STAFF IS
LIKE WE'RE GONNA NEED A SPACE
FOR THIS SOMEWHERE IN THE CITY
.
>> THAT'S NOT SOMETHING THAT
YOU'RE GOING TO PULL TOGETHER A
BUNCH OF SMALL PARCELS.
>> AND SO THAT'S THAT'S MY
CONCERN.
I DON'T KNOW THAT WE WANT TO
FORECLOSE OPPORTUNITIES FOR
THESE LARGE PARCELS FOR THE
FUTURE FOR LAND USES THAT AGAIN
I.
>> I CAN'T IMAGINE
TRANSITIONING EVEN MORE OF WHAT
IS CURRENTLY KIND OF A
RESIDENTIAL NEIGHBORHOOD TO
ADDITIONALLY, YOU KNOW,
EXTENDING THE TRANSITION ZONE
FARTHER INTO WHAT IS CURRENTLY
KIND OF RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
ON THIS MAP.
YOU'RE NOT I CAN'T IMAGINE THAT
YOU'RE GOING TO PUT A NEW
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT SOMEWHERE
NEW.
AND SO ONCE ONCE ON I FEEL LIKE
IT'S REALLY GOING TO BE HARD TO
GET BACK.
SO THIS IS WHY I DON'T LIKE THE
IDEA OF IT BEING FLEX AND
INCLUDING LOTS OF THINGS I I DO
THINK THAT WE NEED TO MAKE SURE
THAT WE HAVE SPACE ESPECIALLY
THAT WE'VE GOT OUR
SUSTAINABILITY, OUR ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT PEOPLE TELLING US
THAT WE NEED SPACE FOR THIS SO
I DON'T LIKE I DON'T LIKE THE
WAY FLECK'S DISTRICT IS
STRUCTURED BUT I LIKE THE IDEA
THAT IT IS COGNIZANT THAT WE
MIGHT NEED LARGE SIGNIFICANT
LANDHOLDINGS FOR SOME THINGS
THAT DON'T NECESSARILY FIT IN A
NEIGHBORHOOD IN A RESIDENTIAL
AREA.
>> SO I WOULD VOTE TO GET RID
OF IT BUT I WOULD INSTEAD
REPLACE IT WITH INDUSTRIAL OR
MANUFACTURING WHATEVER YOU WANT
TO CALL IT.
>> I DON'T WANT TO CALL IT.
OH SORRY.
COMMISSIONER ADAMS, DID YOU SAY
THAT YOU THOUGHT THAT THIS
SHOULD BE TRANSITION SHOULD BE
TRANSITION?
YEP.
OK, SO THAT WOULD BE ALONG WITH
TRANSITIONS ALONG SEVERAL
OF OUR CORRIDORS.
SO WE WOULD BE OK WITH HAVING
WAREHOUSES AND LIGHT INDUSTRIAL
OR OTHER CORRIDORS AS WELL.
TRANSITION ALREADY ALLOWS LIGHT
INDUSTRIAL THOSE THAT I HAVE
RELATED QUESTION I GUESS
WHEREVER AS THE COMMISSION IS
DISCUSSING THIS ONE OF THESE
WOULD BE HELPFUL FOR ME.
I DON'T I'M NOT SAYING THAT IT
HAS MEMORIALIZED IN THIS BUT
HOW LIGHT INDUSTRIAL IS
REALIZED IN THAT TRANSITIONAL
DISTRICT OR IF WE ELIMINATE
THIS DISTRICT DO YOU ENVISION A
LAND USE FRAMEWORK THAT WOULD
PROVIDE FOR SURFACE PARKING
LOTS WHICH FOR EXAMPLE ARE
GOING TO BE DIFFERENT THAN WHAT
THE INTENTION OF THE TRANSITION
DISTRICT?
IT'S REALLY FOCUSING ON
WALKABLE THE IN TRANSIT
ORIENTATION.
I I MEAN I UNDERSTAND THE
QUESTION.
I JUST I THINK IT'S OUT
OF SCOPE.
I DON'T I DON'T WANT TO THERE
MIGHT BE SEVERAL VERSIONS
OF TRANSITION THAT I'M NOT FOR
PURPOSES OF THE TWO BUT YOU'VE
GOT FLEX IN FRONT OF US IN
TRANSITION AND I I YEAH I JUST
DON'T WANT TO GET RID OF FLEX.
IT DOESN'T IT DOESN'T SERVE A
PURPOSE IN THE CURRENT PLAN.
I UNDERSTAND AND I TOTALLY
AGREE THERE MIGHT BE SEVERAL
VERSIONS OF THE TRANSITION
DISTRICT BUT I THINK IN PART
OF CONTEXT IF WE'RE IF WE'RE
TRYING TO HAVE IT BE MORE
INCLUSIVE IT MIGHT BE HELPFUL
FOR US TO MAKE SURE WHEN WE
ALSO LOOK AT THAT DESCRIPTION
TO MAKE SURE THAT IT IS NOT
OVERLY NARROW TO PROVIDE THE
FLEXIBILITY FOR WHAT THOSE
MULTIPLE DISTRICTS MIGHT BE
BECAUSE I FEAR RIGHT NOW AS THE
TRANSITION DISTRICT IS CRAFTED
IT MIGHT PROVIDE THAT I DON'T
SAY LET INDUSTRIAL I DON'T KNOW
THAT THAT IS NECESSARILY GOING
TO OVERCOME THE TRANSIT
ORIENTED MULTIMODAL WALKABLE
EMPHASIS THAT DISTRICT THAT I
ENVISION AS THAT DISTRICT.
SO I WOULD JUST ASK AS THE
COMMISSION IS GOING THROUGH
THAT ARE YOU SUGGESTING LIKE
I'M JUST TRYING TO TRACK WITH
YOU ARE YOU SUGGESTING LIKE A
PARKING MAXIMUM TYPE OF THING?
LIKE WHAT ARE YOU WHAT ARE YOU
SAYING TO TRANSITION?
I'M TRYING TO FIGURE OUT LIKE
WE NEED TO HAVE A BIG SURFACE
AND THEN IF I UNDERSTOOD YOU
CORRECTLY I SUGGESTED WE GO TO
THREE ZONES.
YOU AT THAT END OF THE TABLE
CHUCKLED AND SAID THAT'S NOT
POSSIBLE.
AND I SAID WELL MAYBE IT COULD
BE.
YES.
AND SO THEN AS I TOOK A WEEK TO
THINK ABOUT THAT COMMENT AND
TALK TO HIM ABOUT EVERYONE BUT
I'M MAKING EYE CONTACT SO IF
YOU'RE TRYING TO GET MY
ATTENTION I CAN'T SEE YOU IS IN
TRANSITION YOU MIGHT HAVE
TRANSITION SLOW TRANSITION MID
AND YOU MIGHT HAVE TRANSITION
HIGH AND EACH OF THOSE COULD
TRANSLATE INTO A ZONE AND CARRY
THAT WOULD GIVE YOU THE
FLEXIBILITY THAT I THINK YOU
REFLECTING BACK TO US THAT YOU
SAY YOU NEED IN ORDER TO DO A
PROPER PLANNING WITHIN THE
CITY.
>> YES, THAT'S EXACTLY MY
QUESTION.
I TOTALLY THINK THAT IS A
REALLY VIABLE LOGICAL WAY THAT
WE MIGHT PROCEED IF THIS IS
ENACTED THAT WE MIGHT DO THREE
TRANSITION SOMETHING MR. RIGHT
.
BUT WHERE DO WE START WITH
THAT?
I DON'T KNOW IF YOU REMEMBER
THE TIME WHEN WE REALLY START
WITH INTENTION.
RIGHT.
AND IN THE CASE OF THIS THIS
TRANSITION IS REALLY I MEAN I
READ THE LANGUAGE OF THIS
DISTRICT AS A VERY MULTIMODAL
WALKABLE TRANSIT ORIENTED
DISTRICT AND I DON'T THINK
OF WHEN WE'RE TALKING ABOUT I
THINK THAT THERE'S A
DISTINCTION BETWEEN TRYING TO
PLAN FOR USES THAT DO OR DON'T
FIT IN THAT FRAMEWORK AND I WE
HAVE THE SAME TENSION WITH DC
ONE.
RIGHT.
WE STARTED WHERE WE SAID LIKE
CAR DEALERSHIPS BUT THEN WE
SAID, YOU KNOW, A AS LONG AS
THE BUILDING FORM IS RIGHT.
WHAT DO WE CARE?
AND SO WHEN WE START I JUST
WANT TO BE CLEAR THAT WHEN WE
WERE TALKING ABOUT LIGHT
INDUSTRIAL WE'RE TALKING ABOUT
WAREHOUSING WHEN WE'RE APPLYING
THOSE TO THE TRANSITION
DISTRICT UNLESS WE'RE GOING TO
PROVIDE SOME FLEXIBILITY TO THE
PHYSICAL REALIZATION OF HOW
THOSE USERS GET CREATED FOR
MAINTAINED, WE'RE GOING TO HAVE
TO HAVE THAT SAME CONVERSATION
AS HOW THEY'RE GOING TO FIT
INTO THE INTENTION OF THIS
TRANSITION DISTRICT AND AGAIN,
I THINK WE CAN DO IT BUT I
WOULD SUGGEST THAT IF WE DO GO
TO ELIMINATE THAT AFLEX
DISTRICT AND WE DO WANT TO
PROVIDE THOSE I WOULD JUST I
WOULD SUGGEST I WOULD I COME
FROM THE ASSERTION THAT THERE
ARE USES THAT MIGHT NOT FALL
INTO THAT WHO CARES AS LONG TO
SEE ONE TYPE TYPOLOGY BUILDING
CAN BE MET THERE MIGHT USES
THAT I DON'T THINK WE CAN GET
INTO THAT FORM LIKE A
SELF-STORAGE OR WAREHOUSE OR
BUT WE CAN SENSE THE CITY RIGHT
NOW WE DON'T NEED SELF-STORAGE
COMING IN.
THERE WAS SOMETHING I THOUGHT
WE DID OK.
WE PULLED OUT OF CITYVIEW
DISTRICT OK?
YEAH YEAH I WAS DETERMINED NOT
TO BE APPROPRIATE FOR THAT
COERCER SO I LIKE WHEN YOU'RE
TALKING ABOUT THESE AGAIN I
THINK THERE'S THERE'S
PERSPECTIVES ON IT BUT WHEN
WE'RE TALKING ABOUT THOSE USES
I WOULD BE HELPFUL FOR ME TO
UNDERSTAND AS YOU GO FORWARD TO
BE CLEAR, I DO ENVISION
MULTIPLE DISTRICTS THAT WILL
REALIZE PROBABLY MULTIPLE
OF THESE LAND USE CATEGORIES
BUT PARTICULARLY WITH THIS ONE
I DO THINK THE TRANSITION
DISTRICT AS A PHYSICAL TYPOLOGY
THAT I THINK OF DISTINCT FROM A
SINGLE STORY MAYBE MORE AUTO
Y
USES AND MAYBE WHICH IS THE
SAME AS WE WANT THOSE IN OUR
COMMUNITY AND I DON'T THINK
THAT I DON'T THINK FOR ME I
DON'T THINK THAT'S CORRECT.
I DON'T THINK IT'S CORRECT TO
SAY THAT WE DON'T WANT SINGLE
STORY BUILDINGS IN THE CITY.
I THINK I WOULD BE SAYING I
DON'T WANT TO MANDATE THAT AS A
TYPE SO IT CAN IT'S SORT
OF LIKE THE I THINK THE
CONFUSION THAT I HEAR FROM MY
NEIGHBORS ABOUT THE ELIMINATION
OF SINGLE FAMILY HOMES WE HEAR
PERMITTING MORE DENSITY BUT
THEY ACTUALLY HERE IS MY
HOUSING TYPE IS GOING AWAY AND
MICHELLE HAS SAID YOU DON'T
HAVE TO SELL YOUR HOUSE WHICH
MEANS YOUR HOUSE STAYS BECAUSE
IT IS PERMITTED.
BUT THESE OTHER USES ARE ALSO
PERMITTED AND AND SO THAT IS
WHERE I THINK I AM GOING.
AND I WOULD ALSO LIKE TO SAY I
THINK WE CAN HAVE, YOU KNOW, GO
FROM THIRTY SIX TO AT LEAST 12
ZONING.
THANK YOU.
ALL RIGHT.
SO MICHELLE'S ON WORKED WITH AT
LEAST 12 BUT NOT TWO OR THREE
WOMEN.
I MEAN IF I CAN GET YOU TO 12 I
CAN MAYBE GET YOU TO SIX SO WE
GO FROM THIRTY SIX TO TWELVE
AND THEN WE CAN GET TO SIX
ZONES EVENTUALLY.
SO I THINK I I UNDERSTAND THAT
I DON'T FEEL LIKE WE HAVE TO
TARGET AND RESTRICT IT IN A WAY
THAT I FEEL LIKE THIS DISTRICT
AND I FELT LIKE THAT WAS THE
DISCUSSION AT THE TABLE AT THE
TIME BOTH WITH THE CONSULTANTS
ALL THE WAY THROUGH WITH THE
EXCEPTION OF COUNCIL MEMBERS
THAT SHE HAS BEEN CONSISTENT
AND THANK YOU FOR YOUR
CONSISTENCY ON THIS AND SO HAS
JUST NOTED THAT SHE WASN'T
PRESENT SO SHE WASN'T ABLE TO
RAISE HER VOICE.
BUT LET'S HEAR FROM OTHERS AND
THEN I THINK IT WOULD BE
HELPFUL FOR US TO TRY A STRAW
POLL AND IF WE DON'T LIKE A
STRAW POLL IS GOOD ENOUGH WE
CAN ACTUALLY TAKE A MOTION.
I WOULD LOVE A STRAW POLL.
JUST LET EVERYBODY TALK.
I MEAN I FEEL LIKE THIS ISSUE
WE'VE HAD I'VE HAD A LOT
OF TIMES YOU PROBABLY NOT HAVE
TIME SO KIND OF BUT WE DID TALK
ABOUT IT IN JANUARY.
PEOPLE HAVE THOUGHT ABOUT IT.
THERE ARE APPLICATIONS TO
TRANSITION AND OTHERS ZONES IF
IT'S CUT.
BUT WE CAN TACKLE THOSE AND WE
GET TO THAT.
I JUST FEEL LIKE WE CAN LOOK AT
THIS AND SAY WE WANT TO ENSURE
WE NOT.
IT'S A FAIRLY DISCRETE QUESTION
BUT I SUPPORT LEAVING IT.
ALL RIGHT.
LET'S HEAR FROM COMMISSIONER
WHETHER MTIER WHETHER BE SORRY
OR JULEE EITHER ONE NOT RIGHT.
I DON'T I DON'T KNOW WHY IS
HESITATING WHETHER IT BE AT
SOME POINT RIGHT OR WASN'T
NERMIN SOMEBODY REFERRED TO IN
A OH YEAH.
IN ANOTHER WAY THAT YOU DIDN'T
APPRECIATE.
YEAH WELL PROBABLY IT'S MORE
THAN ONE IS REFERRING TO ME
THAT WAY SO A COUPLE OF THINGS.
SO ONE I'M LOOKING AT THE PLAN
ON PAGE 116 117 AND ESPECIALLY
PAGE ONE SEVENTEEN WHERE IT
SAYS TYPICAL HUB DISTRICT
BUILDING TYPES WHICH I THINK IS
SUPPOSED TO BE TYPICAL FLAKS.
YES, THAT'S RIGHT.
TIMES AND THEN IT INCLUDES
LARGE APARTMENT BUILDING WHICH
IS THE SAME LARGE APARTMENT
BUILDING THAT WAS INCLUDED IN
THE TRANSITION DISTRICT IMAGES
AND SO I'M CONFUSED IF WE'RE
ALLOWING RESIDENTIAL IN THESE
HOW HOW DOES IF WE ALLOW
RESIDENTIAL IN AFLEX DISTRICT,
HOW DOES THAT PREVENT
RESIDENTIAL IN AFLEX DISTRICT?
WAS THAT RESPONSIVE TO OUR SO
DESIRE?
LIKE IT SAYS, PRIMARY USES
INCLUDE RESIDENTIAL AND THERE'S
LARGER BECAUSE WE DIDN'T WANT
TO RESTRICT IT.
THEY DID SO BY SAYING YES TO A
TARGET BY SAYING NOTHING BUT
LIGHT INDUSTRIAL IN HERE AND
THEN WE SAID WE DON'T WANT TO
RESTRICT HOUSING ANY REAL
CITYWIDE.
ALL RIGHT.
SO WE'RE GOING TO GET BY ADDING
THAT IN.
DOES IT STILL IT FEELS LIKE
THEN IT NEGATES I MEAN THIS MAY
BE WHAT EVERYBODY'S SAYING IS
THAT IT NEGATES THE REASON TO
HAVE A FLECK'S DISTRICT BECAUSE
WE'RE SAYING WE WANT A FLEX
DISTRICT THAT DOESN'T ALLOW
RESIDENTIAL BECAUSE RESIDENTIAL
WOULD BE LIKE YOU'RE ASKING
WHAT'S THE DIFFERENCE?
>> YEAH.
YEAH.
SO I THINK THE WAY I UNDERSTAND
THE DIFFERENCE IS THAT
CURRENTLY THE RESIDENTIAL PART
OF FLECK'S DISTRICT HAS ALWAYS
OFFERED WITH A QUALIFIER OR A
CAVEAT.
SO LIKE IF YOU GO TO THE ON ONE
OR TWO FLEXNER'S RESIDENTIAL
WENT INFRASTRUCTURE ALLOWS AND
IF YOU READ IN THE IN THE IN
LONGER FORM TEXT UNDER THE
FLECK'S DISTRICT IT ALSO TALKS
ABOUT INFRASTRUCTURE MAYBE NOT
BEING AND SO IT'S VERY UNCLEAR
AND PART OF THE FEEDBACK WE'VE
GOTTEN FROM MULTIPLE PEOPLE IS
ALSO THAT IT'S JUST DOESN'T IT
DOESN'T MAKE ANY SENSE AS IT
STANDS AND I FEEL A LITTLE BIT
OK, THANK YOU FOR THAT.
SO I FEEL A LITTLE BIT LIKE
THIS DISTRICT EXISTS FOR
REASONS THAT PEOPLE KNOW ABOUT
BUT DON'T LIKE.
ARE THERE DO THESE DISTRICTS
HAVE LIKE DO WE ALREADY KNOW
WHAT DISTRICTS ARE GOING TO
HAVE INFRASTRUCTURE PROBLEMS?
DO WE ALREADY ARE THERE PLANS
OUT THERE FOR THINGS?
ARE THERE LIKE AND NOT TO PUT
ANYBODY ON THE SPOT FOR THAT
BUT IT JUST FEELS LIKE THERE'S
SORT OF REASON BEHIND THIS THAT
I DON'T REALLY UNDERSTAND
ESPECIALLY WHEN THERE'S LIKE
THE SAME PICTURES OR IT JUST
FEELS UNCLEAR AS TO WHY WE
WOULD HAVE THIS AND I CAN
UNDERSTAND THAT WE DON'T WANT
TO JUST BUILD EVERYTHING OUT.
>> BUT THEN I'M GOING TO GO
INTO MY WAYBACK MACHINE AND GO
TO THE LAND, USE OUR CURRENT
LAND USE ON PAGE TWENTY FOUR.
THIS IS FROM 2009 ACHIEVING
LAND USE BALANCE.
SINCE 1990 ANN ARBOR HAS
EXPERIENCED STRONG GROWTH IN A
NUMBER OF LAND USE CATEGORIES
INCLUDING OFFICE RESEARCH,
RESIDENTIAL AND PARKLAND THE
MAJOR LAND USE CATEGORY THAT
HAS NOT GROWN SIGNIFICANTLY
SINCE 1990 HAS BEEN RETAIL.
COMMERCIAL RETAIL CONSTITUTES
APPROXIMATELY THREE POINT TWO
PERCENT OF LAND IN ANN ARBOR,
WHICH IS BELOW THE NATIONAL
AVERAGE BOUBA ADDITIONAL
RESIDENTIAL AND OFFICE
DEVELOPMENT WILL INCREASE
DEMAND FOR RETAIL SERVICES.
AND THE OTHER REASON I SAY THAT
THERE'S NOTHING THERE'S NOT ANY
PARTICULAR GOGIA.
IT'S JUST THAT THINGS CHANGE
AND I AGAIN I'VE SAID BEFORE
LIKE I GREW UP ON THE NORTH
SIDE OF TOWN AND EVERYBODY
THOUGHT INDUSTRIAL WAS GOING TO
BE THERE.
IT ENDED UP GOING TO THE SOUTH
LIKE HOW DO WE IF WE SAVE THE
CERTAIN AREAS HOW IS THERE ANY
LIKE I DON'T SEE DEVELOPMENT
ACTUALLY FOLLOWING THOSE
NECESSARILY LIKE AND SO IT'S A
LITTLE CONFUSING TO ME AS TO
WHY WE WOULD HAVE A FLECK'S
DISTRICT.
WE SET IT, WE DO THIS AND THEN
SOME YOU KNOW THEN WE'RE
TALKING ABOUT INDUSTRIAL SPACE
ON NORTH CAMPUS AND THEN IT
JUST IT SEEMS LIKE WE'RE
CONSTRAINING SOMETHING FOR JUST
RANDOM REASONS AND NOT I DON'T
KNOW IT'S IT'S IT'S HARD FOR ME
TO SAY YES, THIS IS A GREAT
CATEGORY BECAUSE I DON'T
UNDERSTAND WHAT IT IS AND I
DON'T UNDERSTAND WHY IT'S THERE
AND WHAT IT'S DOING RELATIVE TO
TRANSITION.
>> SO YOU DON'T UNDERSTAND WHY
THE RESIDENTIAL IS THERE
DISTRICT FLECK'S DISTRICT LIKE
WHAT ELSE CAN'T BE
ACCOMPLISHED?
>> WHAT'S IN IT THROUGH ONE
OF THE OTHER THREE?
SO I HAVE A QUESTION FOR THE
COMMISSION THEN IS IF WE'RE
TRYING TO ALIGN WITH EIGHT TO
ZERO IN WITH SIZE COMMENTS, IF
THERE WERE TO BE A REUSE CENTER
WHERE DEMOLISHED BUILDINGS WENT
TO BE RECYCLED AND PEOPLE COULD
COME AND USE THEM FOR THEIR
HOMES, WHERE WOULD YOU IMAGINE
THAT USE?
WOULD YOU IMAGINE THAT ALONG
THE TRANSITION CORRIDORS LIKE
ALMOST NOT LIKE A SALVAGE YARD
BUT SIMILAR LIKE TO A PLACE
WHERE YOU LIKE THE REUSE CENTER
USED TO BE OF INDUSTRIAL WHERE
WOULD YOU IMAGINE THAT USE IN
THIS CURRENT FRAMEWORK LIKE ONE
OF THE YEAH.
ONE OF THE OTHER TRANSITION
CORRIDORS WHERE WE'RE CURRENTLY
FLECK'S DISTRICT ZONED WHICH IS
NOT IN FLUX.
I DON'T KNOW THAT I I MEAN I
UNDERSTAND THE QUESTION.
I DON'T THINK I DID ANSWER IT.
OK, DO YOU WANT TO ANSWER I BUT
I DON'T I DON'T THINK IT'S I
JUST DON'T THINK IT'S REAL.
I THINK IT'S A FAIR QUESTION.
I DON'T KNOW TRANSITION WILL
PROVIDE LOTS OF PLACES FOR IT
TO GO AND I DON'T NEED TO KNOW
EXACTLY WHERE IT WILL GO.
>> I THINK ESTABLISHING A
DISTRICT WHERE IT SHOULD GO IN
A TINY SLIVER OF THE CITY
PRESUMES THAT WE KNOW IT SHOULD
GO THERE AND I THINK THAT'S A
LEVEL OF KNOWLEDGE THAT I DON'T
HAVE.
>> I THINK IT ALSO PRESUMES
THAT WE KNOW THAT IT'S GOING TO
HAPPEN RIGHT, RIGHT.
JUST FOR JUST FOR MY I DON'T
ENVISION THAT IN THE
TRANSITION.
SO I AGAIN, I THINK THAT'S WHAT
I'M TRYING TO COVER .
I ENVISION THE TRANSITION ZONES
AS I THINK THE REASON TO KEEP
THE FOCUS ON IS I THINK THAT
THERE IS A USE THAT IS NOT
APPROPRIATE FOR A WALKABLE
CORE.
I TOTALLY UNDERSTAND THAT AND
AND SO I WOULD JUST SUGGEST
THAT IF THE SISTER GOES AWAY WE
SHOULD MAKE SURE THAT OUR
TRANSITION DISTRICT IS BROAD
ENOUGH TO ACCOMMODATE THOSE
USERS IN THE FUTURE.
>> YOU HAVE IT AS FAR AS I CAN
TELL.
THE ONLY THING THAT WE ARE THE
ONLY THING WE ARE GOOD TALKING
ABOUT IS BECAUSE LIGHT
INDUSTRIAL IS ALREADY IN
TRANSITION OFFICE AND
COMMERCIAL CAN EXIST.
TALK OF LOOKING AT ONE OR TWO
IT SAYS SO THE ONLY THING THAT
IS HERE IS ANDY SO BUT THAT'S
NOT WHAT YOU'RE DESCRIBING.
YOU'RE TALKING ABOUT A SALVAGE
YARD.
I MEAN
THE CITY INDUSTRIAL THE
CITY USED TO BE WHERE A PARK IS
THAT THAT TREE THAT WAS JUST
DOWN THE STREET FROM HERE.
SO THOSE THINGS COME AND THEN
THEY GO.
SO I'M JUST STRUGGLING WITH
THERE'S A LOT OF ADVOCACY FOR
THIS DISTRICT AND I AM REALLY
STRUGGLING FOR RIGHT.
IT'S GETTING THIS MUCH SUPPORT.
I CAN'T FORCE ANYONE TO I CAN'T
FORCE THE CONVERSATION BACK ON
ANY PARTICULAR TOPIC.
BUT I REALLY WANT TO HEAR FROM
ALL THE COMMISSIONERS FOURPLEX.
YEAH, LET'S VOTE ON IT AND THEN
YOU HONESTLY IF THERE'S
RECOMMENDATIONS ON HOW TO BE
TRANSITION, I WANT TO HEAR
THOSE AT THAT.
BUT I WANT TO TREAT THE
QUESTION AS SEPARATE.
I WANT TO GET A VOTE ON IT AND
MOVE ON.
>> I KNOW THAT THAT'S WHAT
WE'VE HEARD FROM COMMISSIONER
TO BE COMMISSIONER THIS THAT
YES.
YOU MAY GO OK.
OH IS THAT FAIR?
YES.
YOU HAVE SUPPORTED THE TABLE SO
MY HOUSE WILL BE IN A
TRANSITION ZONE.
>> ODDS ARE GOOD.
SO IS THE IS THE CONCERN AND
AND THERE WILL BE UNDERLYING
ZONING CODES IS THE CONCERN
THAT IF IF WE DON'T HAVE A SPOT
FOR SOMETHING LIKE THE PTO
THRIFT SHOP THEN IT COULD GO
ANYWHERE IN ANY TRANSITION ZONE
AND THAT OR OR AREN'T THERE
GOING TO BE UNDERLYING ZONING
CODES THAT WOULD PUSH THOSE
USES TOWARD SOME APPROPRIATE
AREA OR WOULD GO AWAY BECAUSE
WE'VE WE ARE GETTING RID OF IT.
BUT I WOULD SAY IF I WERE
LOOKING AT YOUR SPECIFIC
NEIGHBORHOOD IT'S HOOVER STREET
AUTO RIGHT PART SO WE APPROVE
THEM TO DO A RENOVATION AND
THAT WAS THEIR PLAN AND THEN
THEY SOLD IT TO THE UNIVERSITY
AND SO THAT FEELS LIKE WHAT
THIS FLECK'S DISTRICT WOULD
HAVE PERMITTED AND IT WAS
ALREADY PERMITTED TO SEE WAS IT
WAS A IT WAS AN OFFICE.
>> WAS IT IT'S EITHER
COMMERCIAL OR FORESE I DON'T
KNOW WHAT RIGHT.
AND SO AND IT WAS ALREADY THERE
AND YOU HAVE A WALKABLE
NEIGHBORHOOD.
IT'S TRANSIT ORIENTED BECAUSE
THE BUSSES COME RIGHT OUT
OF THE LYERLY LUMBER WAS
EXACTLY RIGHT DOWN THE STREET.
SO I'M TRYING TO UNDERSTAND THE
I'M TRYING TO UNDERSTAND THE
AND WE THINK IT'S MORE THIS IS
WHERE WE'LL COME BACK TO THE
DEFINITION OR WHAT THE INTENT
IS.
BUT LIKE IT'S IF IF WE COLLAPSE
THESE THEN I DON'T THINK THAT
THE INTENT FOR EITHER OF THEM
WORKS LIKE THEN IF YOU WANT IF
YOU WANT SAY OH THERE'S A
FLAVOR OF THINGS THAT HAPPEN
DOWN BY THE BUS DEPOT.
RIGHT.
LIKE THAT'S NOT A LOVELY PLACE
TO WALK BY BUT PUT IT'S A VERY
LARGE BUILDING BUT THERE'S NOT
MUCH GOING ON.
IT'S NOT VERY UNLIKE YOU.
I RECYCLE IT.
>> IT'S JUST NOT AN ENGAGING
PLACE TO WALK BY THAT'S
DIFFERENT THAN I THINK THE WAY
THAT THE TRANSITION ZONE
INTENDED FOR HELP WHATEVER
DISTRICT IS WRITTEN RIGHT NOW
WHICH IS LIKE THIS IS A
WALKABLE PLACE LIKE THIS IS
WHAT WE WANT, YOU KNOW.
SO THAT'S I THINK THE THING IS
THAT IF WE MERGE THEM THAT'S
WHERE IT BECOMES TRICKY.
BUT ALL RIGHT.
BRITISH SO UM
I WHEN I WHEN I
PICTURE THIS DISTRICT I PICTURE
SOME INDUSTRIAL IT IS NEVER A
PLACE THAT I WALK IS A PLACE I
DIS ENJOY WRITING BUT I DO
WRITE IT AND IT IS BECAUSE
OF ITS RHYTHM IT'S BECAUSE
THERE ARE THESE REALLY BIG
YARDS OF THINGS AND I JUST FIND
IT UNENJOYABLE AND AGAIN I KNOW
I HEAR FROM OTHER COUNCIL
MEMBERS WHOSE DISTRICTS ARE
THERE BECAUSE MINE IS NOT
ANYWHERE NEAR THERE BUT THEY
GET COMPLAINTS, THEY GET
COMPLAINTS ABOUT THE LIGHTS ON
THE ANN ARBOR PUBLIC SCHOOL
PROPERTY THAT'S DOWN THERE.
SO I MEAN THERE ARE THINGS THAT
WE WOULDN'T EVEN CONSIDER VERY
MESSY THAT PEOPLE ARE DISTURBED
BY AND DON'T LIKE LIVING NEAR.
SO THAT SAYS TO ME THAT THERE
IT IS USEFUL TO HAVE A PLACE
WHERE THINGS THAT PEOPLE MIGHT
COMPLAIN ABOUT ARE HAPPENING
AND SO BUT YOU AND I ALSO HEAR
THAT WHAT DANIELLE IS SAYING
BECAUSE AGAIN I'M FOLLOWING A
DIFFERENT POLICY WITH NAMES IS
THAT ANYTHING THAT WE THAT WE
RISK PEOPLE SELLING OUT TO THE
UNIVERSITY RATHER THAN THE
HOUSING DEVELOPER WHO'S GOING
TO COME THERE BECAUSE THE PART
OF WHAT MAKES THIS PART OF TOWN
SENSITIVE IS THAT IT'S
EXTREMELY CLOSE TO THE
UNIVERSITY AND RIPE FOR THINGS
THAT YOU WANT TO BE YOU KNOW,
WANT TO WALK FROM WALK TO THE
UNIVERSITY LIKE THEY WANT TO
LIVE THERE OR WHATEVER.
SO I THINK THIS WOULD HAVE
PRESSURE FOR IF IF RESIDENTIAL
IS ALLOWED THERE, WHICH IT IS
NOW BECAUSE WE SAID WE WOULDN'T
LET IT GO WITHOUT RESIDENTIAL.
I DO THINK RISKS GETTING BOUGHT
OUT.
SO I THINK OF IT AS A PLACE
THAT IT IS AND I THINK IS THE
PLACE THAT IT IS.
IT'S NOT PARTICULARLY WORKABLE
TO ME BUT I FIND USEFUL THINGS.
THERE ARE THINGS THAT I WOULD
LIKE TO BE IN THE CITY
REGARDLESS OF HOW MUCH TAX THEY
GENERATE AND UM AND MY CONCERN
I HEARD SOMEONE SAY IN SOME
CONVERSATION THAT THERE
ACTUALLY WASN'T A LOT
OF INFRASTRUCTURE THERE BECAUSE
IT ISN'T CURRENTLY A HIGH
PEOPLE DENSITY NEIGHBORHOOD AND
SO WE WOULD IT WOULD BE WE
WOULD NEED TO BE CAREFUL ABOUT
SOMEONE THINKING THAT THEY WERE
GOING TO PUT A LARGE
RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT BECAUSE
THEY'RE PROBABLY THERE MAY NOT
BE UM, SEWER OR WATER OR I
DON'T KNOW WHICH OF THEM THERE
MAY NOT BE I MEAN IT'S I MEAN
SO THERE ARE CONSTRAINTS ON IT
AND IT JUST SEEMS LIKE IT'S THE
PLACE IT HAS THE THINGS WE
DON'T HAVE ELSEWHERE BUT YOU
KNOW BUT AGAIN YEAH THAT'S I
DON'T I DON'T BELIEVE WE CAN
VOTE THIS I'M GOING TO VOTE FOR
IT BUT IT'S OK.
>> ALL RIGHT.
COMMISSIONER HAMMERSCHMIDT, I
REALLY SMART THINGS TO SAY BUT
MY COPIES ARE SO I'LL TRY TO BE
BRIEF THE WAY THAT THIS IS NOW
WRITTEN FLUX VERSUS TRANSITION
WITH THE EXCEPTION OF I AGREE
WITH SARAH THAT WE WOULD NEED
TO REWRITE THE INTENT
STATEMENT.
I MY ONLY COMMENT ON THIS PAGE
FOR WHENEVER I REVIEWED IT WAS
CUT BECAUSE IT SEEMS LIKE IT'S
IT SEEMS LIKE IT'S VERY
DIFFICULT TO KNOW WHAT IS GOING
ON WITH TRANSITION AND I THINK
THAT THERE ARE DEFINITELY GOING
TO BE NUANCES.
IT'S A DIFFERENT I MEAN THIS IS
THIS IS SORT OF A SIMILAR THING
TO WHAT WE'VE BEEN HEARING
ABOUT THE LOW DENSITY
RESIDENTIAL SINGLE FAMILY
NEIGHBORHOODS ACROSS THE CITY.
THEY JUST DO NOT LOOK THE SAME
IN APPLYING THIS EXACT STANDARD
.
BLANKETING THE CITY DOESN'T
MAKE SENSE AND I THINK THIS IS
WHERE WE WILL GET INTO THESE
NUANCES IN ZONING.
>> SO I GUESS ALL THAT TO SAY
I'M IN FAVOR OF CUTTING FLEX
WORKING THESE USERS IN
TRANSITION AND THEN SORT
OF REWORKING SOME OF THE
LANGUAGE IN THIS PLAN TO MAKE
SURE THAT WE DO ALLOW THESE
USES SOMEWHERE.
>> IF SOMEONE WERE TO COME INTO
THE CITY AND SAY I WANT TO
LOCATE X THING THAT I NEED A
LARGE PARCEL FOR, I I'M
HESITANT TO JUST LEAVE IT FOR
SPECULATION AND I GUESS I'M
ALSO CURIOUS AND THIS IS FROM
BACK TO THE CONSULTANTS WHICH
ALSO GOES BACK TO THE FACT THAT
I AGREE THAT I THINK THAT THIS
PLANE IS MISSING A LOT OF DATA.
DID THEY DO ANY PROJECTIONS ON
JOB GROWTH AND FUTURE
EMPLOYMENT ETC. BECAUSE I JUST
FEEL LIKE RIGHT NOW IT'S A LOT
OF LIKE MAYBE MORE STUFF WILL
COME IN AND WE NEED TO LIKE
HOLD SPACE FOR BIT LIKE I
HAVEN'T SEEN ANY OF THAT STUFF
.
ALL RIGHT, COMMISSIONER UAMS
WELL I BEGAN BY JUST SAYING
I'LL DELETE IT.
>> I DON'T KNOW I NEED TO BACK
IT UP BECAUSE IT'S TEN THIRTY
BUT I JUST WANT TO SAY AND I
MEAN S AND SO FOR ME THE WE
COULD TALK ABOUT FLECK'S
DISTRICT IN THE ABSTRACT.
I DON'T THINK IT MAKES ANY
SENSE.
I THINK WE COULD TALK ABOUT IT
IN SPECIFICITY WHERE IT
CURRENTLY IS AND I WOULD SAY IT
ONLY MAKES SENSE S OF ELSWORTH
OR WHATEVER IT IS.
YEAH SORT OF YEAH.
LIKE WHERE THE RESEARCH
DEPARTMENT RING IS MAYBE I
WOULD NEVER WANT IT IN S
INDUSTRIAL BECAUSE ALL THE
INDUSTRIAL ACTION IS LIKE A
SUPER VIBRANT CORRIDOR AND
THERE'S WOODBERRY GARDENS IS ON
SOLID ESTRIOL WHICH IS LIKE ONE
OF THE LARGEST APARTMENT
COMPLEXES IN THE CITY.
IT'S TWO BLOCKS FROM PACARD
WHICH WE TALK ALL THE TIME.
IS THIS AMAZING KIND OF LIKE
ABOUT TO GROW PEDESTRIAN AND
TRANSPORTATION FROM THE
CORRIDOR AND WITH MY
ARCHITECTURE PROFESSOR HAT ON I
THOUGHT A STUDIO HOUSING STUDIO
IS STUDENTS WHERE WE WORK WITH
JENNIFER HALL AND THE HOUSING
COMMISSION AND WE DID PROPOSALS
FOR THE HOUSING COMMISSION SITE
WHICH IS ALSO WHERE ALL THE
FLEET VEHICLES GAS UP AND
CHARGE AND BOTTOM LINE AS BIG
WATER TANK THERE ARE A LOT
OF ISSUES ON THE FINANCING SIDE
FOR THAT SITE THAT MAKE IT HARD
TO DEVELOP.
BUT IF WE REASONED IT I BELIEVE
OUR HOUSING COMMISSION COULD
ACTUALLY DEVELOP THAT OR SELL
IT.
WE COULD HAVE AFFORDABLE
HOUSING THERE.
BUT THAT'S MY POINT IS THAT IN
THE IN DOING THAT WHEN WE WENT
WITH THE STUDENTS I THINK THEY
ALL SHOWED UP ON THAT SITE WITH
AN IDEA THAT THIS WAS A
TERRIBLE PLACE FOR HOUSING
BECAUSE IT'S NEXT TO LIBROS
ELECTRIC AND THEN THEY LOOKED
INTO IT AND THEY ACTUALLY LIKE
OH THERE'S RESERVES RIGHT THERE
AND THERE'S THIS RESTAURANT
RIGHT THERE AND WE'RE TWO
BLOCKS FROM YORK AND THERE'S A
CHURCH AND THERE'S A CHURCH AND
AND THERE'S A BUS THAT GOES
RIGHT HERE AND THIS WOULD
ACTUALLY BE A REALLY GREAT
PLACE TO LIVE.
AND IF YOU MADE A LITTLE
FOOTBRIDGE OVER THE RAILROAD OR
STATE STREET IS RIGHT THERE
LIKE I WOULD REALLY NOT WANT
STOP INDUSTRIAL TO BE A PLACE
WHERE WE HAVE SCRAPYARDS AND NO
HOUSING OR THAT WE RESERVE FOR
AN IDEA THAT WE MIGHT NEED
SCRAPYARDS AND WE HAVE HOUSING.
THE OTHER ONES ARE LIKE THIS
TINY SLIVER I MEAN THIS PARCEL
RIGHT NEXT TO COUNTY FARM PARK.
THOSE OTHER PLACES ALSO DON'T
MAKE SENSE TO ME SO THAT IN
SPECIFICITY I THINK IT ALSO
DOESN'T MAKE SENSE AND IN THE
ABSTRACT IT DOESN'T MAKE SENSE
AND I WOULD VOTE TO STRIKE IT.
THANK YOU COMMISSIONER MILLS.
OK, COMMISSIONER ADAMS
COMMISSIONER NORTON, I'M
HONESTLY REALLY STRUGGLING WITH
THIS BECAUSE I SEE THE
ARGUMENTS ON BOTH SIDES.
UM BUT I THINK A LOT OF THE
PROBLEMS THAT EXIST WITH THE
CURRENT INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITIES
ARE AS MUCH DESIGN PROBLEMS AS
ANYTHING ELSE.
LOOK AT THE LAND AREA SOUTH
OF NINETY FOUR.
THIS IS A HUGE WASTE OF LAND
THE WAY EVERYTHING'S SPREAD OUT
ALL OF THE HUGE HONKIN BIG
PARKING LOTS AND I THINK
SETTING ASIDE LAND SO THAT WE
CAN WASTE MORE LAND JUST
DOESN'T MAKE SENSE TO ME AND
KIND.
I'M ALSO THINKING ABOUT THE I
GET THAT WE NEED TO HAVE PLACES
IN THE CITY TO TO DO THE THINGS
THAT CITIES NEED TO DO AND I'M
PARTICULARLY DRAWN TO THE THE
CIRCULATING USES AND THE
MESSINESS OF THOSE AND THAT'S
THE THING THAT'S GIVING ME THE
MOST POWERS.
I KNOW THAT I WANT TO BLOCK
THEM OUT BUT I THINK WE CAN DO
BETTER THROUGH DESIGN RATHER
THAN JUST DROPPING OUR PLACES
AND SAY LET'S JUST CONTINUE TO
DESIGN THEM BADLY AND LET THEM
BE BAD PLACES BECAUSE WE THINK
MAYBE WE MIGHT NEED THEM IN THE
FUTURE WHEN WE KNOW TODAY WE
HAVE A HUGE HOUSING CRISIS THAT
WE REALLY NEED TO DEAL WITH
TODAY.
>> SO I GUESS ON BALANCE I
DON'T FEEL THAT STRONGLY ABOUT
IT.
I KNOW SOME FOLKS HAVE STRONG
FEELINGS ABOUT IT.
I'M REALLY PRETTY INDIFFERENT
BUT ON BALANCE I'M LEANING MORE
TOWARDS JUST NOT HAVING THE
FLECK'S DISTRICT.
I DO THINK IT'S PROBLEMATIC TO
PUT IT IN THAT TRANSITION
BECAUSE I THINK WHAT WE'RE
GOING TO END UP DOING IS KIND
OF RECREATING FLEX IN BITCOIN
TRANSITION BUT MAYBE THAT'LL
HAPPEN IN A MORE NUANCED WAY
THAN JUST SETTING ASIDE CHUNKS
OF LAND AND CALLING IT FLECK'S
FROM THE GET GO.
SO I THINK I'M GOING TO LEAN
TOWARDS VOTING NOT TO INCLUDE
THE FLEX DISTRICTS ACT.
COMMISSIONER ADAMS, YOU WANTED
THAT I MEAN THAT'S A REALLY
GOOD POINT.
I JUST THINK THE ONLY THING I
WANT TO SAY IS I THINK THERE'S
A FLAVOR OF TRANSITION THAT CAN
BE THE PROBLEM WITH FLUXES THAT
IT'S IT'S A HYBRID OF A COUPLE
OF THINGS THAT ONCE IT GOT
HOUSING INTRODUCED IT WAS NO
LONGER INDUSTRIAL WHICH WE
DIDN'T WANT I THINK RIPPING IT
OUT AND HAVING A FLAVOR
OF TRANSITION IT WORKS AND IS
DESIGNED FOR WHAT THOSE THINGS
ARE EVEN IF THAT ADDS ANOTHER
LAYER OF COMPLEXITY.
THE TRANSITION SEEMS PREFERABLE
TO ME THAN THE POLICY CHOICE
THAT FLEX MAKES LIKE THE POLICY
THAT I CAN'T AND THAT'S THAT'S
MY PROBLEM.
ALL RIGHT.
LET'S DO LET'S START WITH A
STRAW POLL ALL THOSE IN FAVOR
PUTTING FLEX.
CAN YOU RAISE YOUR HANDS SO I
CAN COUNT ON YOU PLACING THE
TRANSITION THAT I DIDN'T THE
SECOND I THINK WE CAN EAT WELL.
WHAT DO YOU ALL WANT TO DO?
WELL, BECAUSE YEAH, I MEAN WE
CAN SPLIT IT.
I WOULD COMBINE IT OK.
>> YOU WANT ME?
YEAH WELL MY MY CHURCH NOW IS
IN FLUX.
I HADN'T HAD PLANNED WHICH
DOESN'T FOR ME DOESN'T MAKE A
LOT OF SENSE BECAUSE GREENHILLS
JUST GOT SOME RENEWAL AND THE
REASON WHY IT IS IS BECAUSE
IT'S ALL ZONTA OFFICE AND
THERE'S TWO AUTO REPAIR SHOPS
BETWEEN SEMINOLES AND OUR
CHURCH BUT YOU KNOW IT IT
DOESN'T MAKE A LOT OF SENSE TO
ME SO I CAN SEE HOW IT SORT
LANDED THERE SO I'M HAPPY TO
CUT IT AND ABSORB IT INTO
TRANSITION BECAUSE THAT IS WHAT
WE CURRENTLY HAVE IN PLACE.
SO BETTER DIRECTION IT'S
REPLACED.
>> YEAH.
ALL RIGHT.
SO LET ALL THOSE IN FAVOR
OF THAT.
LET'S SEE YOUR HANDS.
SO WE'VE GOT ONE, TWO, THREE,
FOUR, FIVE, SIX ALL THOSE
APPOSE TWO.
ALL RIGHT.
SO DO WE NEED TO TAKE A MOTION
OR IS THAT SUFFICIENT FOR YOU
TO CUT IT?
ALL RIGHT.
EXCELLENT.
IT CUT AND REPLACED WITH
TRANSITION IF IT MAKES SENSE
BASED ON THE RUBRIC YOU'RE
CREATING OF HOW YOU'RE DOING.
YOU HAVE BEEN TO THE STRAW
POLL.
IT'S IT'S GONE NOW.
THERE WERE NO CHANGES TO
TRANSITION ALL RIGHT.
SO IT IS TEN THIRTY EIGHT WE
WELL ARE YOU ALL LAUGHING AT ME
?
OK, SO WE CAN HAVE A STARTING
POINT OF THE TRANSITION
DISTRICT WHERE WE CAN STOP HERE
AND THEN PICK THIS UP NEXT WEEK
IF YOU WANT TO DO THAT WE STOP
AND PICK THIS UP NEXT WEEK.
SO THAT'S NORTEN ANY ONE ELSE
COULD YOU SOMEBODY JUST VERY
BRIEFLY WE'VE ENDED UP BRIEFLY
REVIEW FOR ME IF WE DO THAT
WORK SCHEDULE WISE IS THAT OK?
YES.
YEAH.
AS LONG AS WE FINISH ALL OF OUR
EFFORTS NEXT WEEK WE ARE NOT
GOING TO REVIEW CHAPTER SIX
RIGHT NOW.
SO WE HAVE WE HAD WE ARE ALL
OF YEP.
SO WE COULD TAKE WE COULD TAKE
TWENTY TWO MORE MINUTES IF YOU
ALL WANTED TO TONIGHT AND TALK
ABOUT TRANSITION OR WE CAN MOVE
IT TO NEXT WEEK HOW WE MOVE IT
JUST BECAUSE PETER AND
CHOPPERING LIKE STOPPING THE
MIDDLE OF THAT TIME THAT'S THE
UPCOMING THAT'S ONE TO
EVERYBODY OK I'M GOING TO MOVE
I WON'T BE HERE NEXT WEEK BUT I
CAN CIRCULATE ALL OF MY
COMMENTS.
IT'S JUST RIGHT AND JUST CUT IT
JUST TRANSITION NOW I'D LIKE TO
SEND YOU MY COMMENTS WHICH WILL
BE I BELIEVE THE AUTHORITIES I
HAVE BECAUSE I DIDN'T OH.
SO I'LL DO THAT PLEASURE.
>> I'M SORRY.
I WOULD JUST SAY I I EXPECT
THAT TRANSITION IS GOING TO
TAKE A LOT MORE TIME OR EDITING
TO TRY TO MOVE THESE THINGS
TOGETHER.
IF WE DO THINK THAT THERE'S
SOME FLAVOR TO ACCOMMODATE
THAT.
>> SO I JUST WANT TO WARN US
ABOUT HOW MUCH TIME WE NEED
MORE AND OR IF WHILE THIS IS
FRESH ON OUR MINDS, IF IT'S
HELPFUL TO JUST LIKE ENUMERATE
THE THINGS THAT WE MIGHT THINK
AND THEN SLEEP ON THEM OR SEND
THEM ALONG BECAUSE WE WON'T
HAVE NEW THINGS TO READ BETWEEN
NOW AND THEN.
I DON'T KNOW IF THAT'S HELPFUL
.
IT IS ALL RIGHT.
I'M SORRY, COMMISSIONER.
I INTERRUPTED YOU I WASN'T HERE
LAST WEEK BUT I WAS I WAS
ANNOUNCED.
THAT'S TRUE.
UM, WHAT HAPPENS TO THE
COMMENTS THAT WE SUBMIT TO YOU
AND THEN WE'RE ABSENT FROM
WOMAN HERE YOU'RE IS TITLE
THAT'S LIKE CAME IN AFTER THE
DEADLINE.
THEY DON'T GET THEY DON'T GO TO
THE COUNCIL SO THIS IS WHAT I'M
PLANNING TO DO.
>> YOU ALL HAVE SENT ME FAR
MORE COMMENTS THAN WE HAVE
DISCUSSED PUBLICLY.
SO MY GOAL FOR THE FIRST ROUND
WAS TO SEND THEM ALL THE EDITS
THAT WE HAVE DISCUSSED PUBLICLY
BECAUSE THOSE WERE THE LARGER
COMMENTS THAT WE HAD.
IF THEY'RE SMALL ENOUGH I CAN
ALSO WORK WITH THEM TO GET SOME
OF THOSE IN.
BUT THE SMALLER COMMENTS MIGHT
HAVE TO WAIT TILL ROUND TWO OR
OR THAT'S OR THEY MIGHT BE
THINGS THAT NO ONE ELSE AGREES
WITH.
SO ION'T SEE WHAT THINGS WE
DISCUSSED.
I JUST WANTED TO KNOW WHAT THE
PROCESS WAS.
HOW DID YOU GET WHAT YOU NEED
IT?
MICHELLE I'M GOING TO JUST READ
THE ROOM AND MOVE ON TO AGENDA
ITEM NUMBER ELEVEN PUBLIC
COMMENT.
THIS IS A SECOND OPPORTUNITY
FOR INDIVIDUALS TO SPEAK FOR UP
TO THREE MINUTES ON ANY ISSUE.
WE'LL FIRST HEAR FROM THOSE WHO
ARE PRESENT IN THE CHAMBER AND
THERE ARE PEOPLE PRESENT IN THE
CHAMBER TONIGHT THEN REMOTE
PARTICIPANTS TO SPEAK REMOTELY
PESTANA ON PHONE OR USE THE
RACE HAND FEATURE FOR RESUME
UTILIZERS.
YOU WILL HEAR AN ANNOUNCEMENT
WHEN IT'S YOUR TURN TO SPEAK.
PLEASE ENSURE THAT YOU ARE IN A
QUIET AREA AND MUTE ANY
BACKGROUND NOISE FOR PHONE
ACCESS CALL EIGHT SEVEN SEVEN
EIGHT FIVE THREE FIVE TO FOUR
SEVEN AND INTERMEETING I'D NINE
SEVEN SEVEN SIX SIX THREE FOUR
ONE TWO TWO SIX.
>> FOR ALL PARTICIPANTS PLEASE
STATE YOUR NAME AND ADDRESS AT
THE BEGINNING OF YOUR COMMENTS.
IS THERE ANYONE PRESENT WHO
WOULD LIKE TO SPEAK AT THIS
TIME?
MIKE SCAVO TWENTY SEVENTEEN
VERSTRAETE YOU'RE ON THE POCKET
OF BIG DEVELOPERS SO YOU SHOULD
SPEND LESS TIME DISAGREEING AND
THEN YOU COULD GO HOME EARLIER.
IN ALL SERIOUSNESS YOU ARE VERY
EXPERIENCED PROFESSIONALS AND I
REALLY APPRECIATE THE THE
NUANCE DEBATE THAT YOU HAVE
WITH THESE TOPICS.
IT'S COMPLICATED AND YOU CARE.
SO THANK YOU.
I WAS GOING TO SAY THAT I LAST
YEAR I DID THE TWO COMMUNITY
ACADEMY AND I GOT TO MEET A LOT
OF STAFF MEMBERS ACROSS THE
CITY AND AGAIN I WAS VERY
IMPRESSED WITH HOW PROFESSIONAL
EVERYBODY WAS.
PEOPLE WHO ARE VERY EXPERIENCED
AND KNOWLEDGEABLE ABOUT THEIR
AREAS OF EXPERTIZE AND THAT'S
ACTUALLY WHY I WAS A LITTLE BIT
SURPRISED WHEN I READ THE
AGENDA ITEM WITH STAFF COMMENTS
BECAUSE A LOT OF THEM SEEMED I
DON'T KNOW IF I CAN USE THIS
TERM BUT LIKE CAR BRAINED OR
KIND OF AN OLD SCHOOL THINKING
LIKE THERE WAS THE COMMENT
ABOUT IF THERE WAS NO PARKING
WHERE WILL THE TRASH GO?
AND THEN IN SOME THE DISCUSSION
OF LIKE WASTE WATER I
APPRECIATE THAT YOU BROUGHT UP
LIKE USE OF WATER WILL CHANGE
OVER TIME AND IT SEEMED LIKE
THAT STUDY JUST ASSUMED A FIXED
RATE OF WATER USAGE WHICH
DIDN'T SEEM LIKE A VERY GOOD
ASSUMPTION.
SO SENIOR MICHELLE, I'M I'M
GLAD THAT YOU SAID THAT THOSE
STAFF COMMENTS ARE NOT THE FULL
COMMENTS.
IT SOUNDS LIKE YOU PARTICULARLY
PULLED OUT THE ONES THAT WERE
DISAGREEING
WITH PLANNING
COMMISSION.
RIGHT.
SO I THINK THAT'S A IT'S
IMPORTANT TO THAT'S NOT THE
ENTIRETY OF STAFF COMMENT BUT
AREAS OF EXISTING DISAGREEMENT
WHICH MAY BE I DON'T KNOW
COVERS OTHER LARGER AREAS WHERE
STAFF MIGHT BE AGREEING WITH
PLANNING COMMISSION.
UM, SO GETTING INTO SOME OF THE
DETAILS HERE I'LL RUN THROUGH
VERY QUICKLY.
UH, I GUESS WE'VE JUST GOTTEN
RID OF FLEX SO I'M GLAD TO GO
INTO THAT.
I GUESS WHAT I WANT TO
HIGHLIGHT THAT LIKE WE SHOULD
NOT BE MAKING CHOICES FOR
PEOPLE SOME PEOPLE MIGHT BE
EXCITED ABOUT LIVING NEXT TO
THE BUS DEPOT.
SOME PEOPLE REALLY LIKE BUSSES
AND JUST BECAUSE ONE PERSON
DOESN'T WANT THAT OTHER PEOPLE
MIGHT BE INTERESTED IN IT.
I GREW UP IN A HOUSE THAT WAS
UNDERNEATH A THE FLIGHT PATH
COMING OUT OF PHILADELPHIA
AIRPORT.
I GOT USED TO THE NOISE VERY
QUICKLY AND I GOT TO GROW UP IN
A VERY LARGE PIECE OF LAND
BECAUSE IT WAS BETWEEN A
HIGHWAY AND A FLIGHT.
SO PEOPLE MAKE DIFFERENT TRADE
OFFS THAN WE SHOULD LET THEM
MAKE THOSE TRADE REALLY QUICK
ON THE STAFF PARTICULAR ABOUT
ON SUSTAINABILITY.
I APPRECIATE THE DISCUSSION
AROUND EMISSIONS AND THE BUILT
ENVIRONMENT.
I THINK WE OFTEN FORGET ABOUT
WHAT WE PUT AS SCOPE THREE
EMISSIONS FROM PEOPLE WHO ARE
COMMUTING AND THE DOWNSIDE
OF SPRAWL SO EVEN THOUGH WE
MIGHT NOT BE ACCOUNTING FOR
THAT IN THE WAY THAT I THINK WE
SHOULD BE, LET'S NOT FORGET
ABOUT ALL THAT COMMUTING
TRAFFIC THAT CONTRIBUTE TO OUR
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT.
I'LL LEAVE IT THERE.
THANK YOU.
THANK YOU
.
>> NO ONE ELSE INSIDE THE
CHAMBER I SEE WE HAVE EIGHT
PARTICIPANTS.
DID ANY OF THEM RAISE THEIR
HAND TO ADDRESS THE PLANNING
COMMISSIONER?
MR ALEX LOWE, YOU HAVE IF I
PUSH THE RIGHT BUTTONS
ALEX YOU
HAVE THREE MINUTES TO ADJUST
THE PLANNING COMMISSION.
I JUST WANT TO SAY I REALLY
LIKE BUSSES, WOULD LOVE TO LIVE
NEAR TO MORE BUSSES TO MARK'S
POINT.
OH RIGHT.
ALEX LOWER TWENTY TWO AND THAT
I REALLY APPRECIATE ALL THE
DISCUSSION AND SAID TO SEE HOW
MANY OF THE PEOPLE WHO CAME TO
SPEAK OF THE COMMENT EARLIER
DIDN'T STAY FOR THE MEETING.
THANK YOU.
THANK YOU
.
>> PROBLEM WITH THE PHONE
NUMBER ENDING WITH FIVE THREE
FOUR SIX TO ADDRESS THE
PLANNING COMMISSION FOR THREE
MINUTES.
HELLO THIS IS TOM STALBERG
AGAIN STILL HERE.
>> I WANT TO HEAR THIS JUST
OVER YOU'VE EITHER DISCONNECTED
OR BEAT YOURSELF OVER AGAIN.
HELLO THERE YOU ARE.
CAN YOU HEAR ME?
>> YES.
SORRY BUT THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
OK, UP OVER ONE TWO ZERO TWO
THREE THE STREET A COUPLE
OF GENERAL COMMENTS FROM ONE
OF YOUR CALLERS OF THE COMMENTS
PLAN THE EQUITY TELLER OR DO
YOU HAVE SOME CITY WIDE CHANGES
HERE PUTTING THINGS INTO
CATEGORIES THAT ARE PRETTY
BROAD COVERING THE WHOLE CITY
IN TERMS OF THE SINGLE FAMILY
DUPLEX I ONE OUR TWO CATEGORY
WE DO HAVE ABOUT A HOMEOWNERS
ASSOCIATION CONDO ASSOCIATION.
THESE PEOPLE ARE VERY DEED
RESTRICTIONS.
ALL THOSE RIGHT OVER THE TOP
OF ANY UNDERLYING ZONING CHANGE
THAT WOULD COME OUT
OF COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
I DON'T KNOW HOW THAT'S BEEN
EVALUATED AND STUDIED YET TO
KNOW HOW MANY RESIDENCES
ESSENTIALLY WOULD NOT BE
IMPACTED IN THE SAME WAY AS
OTHER RESIDENCES.
FOR EXAMPLE, A TYPICAL
HOMEOWNER'S ASSOCIATION MIGHT
SAY THAT YOU CAN'T HAVE MORE
THAN ONE SINGLE FAMILY UNIT ON
A LOT THAT WOULD PREVAIL OVER
THE ZONING.
SO IF WE'RE GOING TO HAVE AN
EQUITABLE SOLUTION AND EQUITY
BEING ONE THE OF THIS
COMPREHENSIVE LAND USE PLAN, WE
NEED TO AT LEAST ACKNOWLEDGE
THAT SOMEWHERE IN THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN I PROBABLY
WOULD BE EITHER WITH A MAP OR
NUMERICALLY IDENTIFYING
SPECIFICALLY THE AREAS THAT
WILL AND WILL NOT BE IMPACTED.
THIS KIND OF RELATE TO A
CONVERSATION ABOUT HISTORIC
DISTRICTS AND SHOWING THOSE
THAT YOU HAD EARLIER.
I BELIEVE THAT THE PREVIOUS
MEETING PROFILE TALK ABOUT
ZONING IN GENERAL AND THE
COMMENT THAT SOMETIMES PEOPLE
HAVE ABOUT FEAR MONGERING OR
ASSUMING THE WORST OR IT'S IF
YOU'RE PROPERLY TRAINED IN
ZONING THAT'S EXACTLY WHAT
YOU'RE SUPPOSED TO DO.
ZONING GIVES CERTAIN RIGHTS TO
A PROPERTY.
IT'S A SET OF RIGHTS.
THAT'S WHY IT'S CALLED MY RIGHT
THAT IS OWNING CATEGORY GIVES
TO THE PROPERTY WHEN YOU IT TO
HEAR WE'RE HAVING COMMENTS AND
WE'RE DECIDING WHAT IS GOING TO
END UP BEING AND A ZONING
DECISION LATER THAT ZONING IS A
SET OF LEGAL RIGHTS.
YOU ARE SUPPOSED TO EVALUATE
THE SPECTRUM OF THE POSSIBLE
OUTCOMES AND NOT JUST SAY
WHAT'S MOST LIKELY OUTCOME,
WHAT'S THE BEST OUTCOME BUT
ALSO ALWAYS SAY WHAT THE WORST
OUTCOME AND MAYBE THAT'S NOT
THE RIGHT WORD JUST SAYING THE
ENDS OF THE SPECTRUM THAT THE
OUTCOME IS HOW YOU'RE SUPPOSED
TO EVALUATE IN ANY REZONING AND
ALSO IN THIS PROCESS RIGHT NOW
NOT RESTRAINED BY SOME OF THE
BEST LEGAL MINDS THAT WERE MY
MENTORS WHEN I WAS A TELEVISION
DEVELOPER.
>> THEY ALL KNOW THAT IS HOW
YOU'RE SUPPOSED TO THINK ABOUT
IT.
SO WHEN PEOPLE FEAR MONGERING
THAT'S REALLY AN INACCURATE
COMMENT THEY'RE DOING WHAT
THEY'RE SUPPOSED TO DO
UNDERSTAND WHAT THE VARIOUS
ENDS OF THE SPECTRUM COULD BE.
THANK YOU.
THE SUGGESTIONS YOU CAN
COMMISSION FOR THREE MINUTES.
I THANK YOU.
FIRST I THIS IS LISA EVANS TEN
FIFTY FOR MARTIN PLACE.
I WAS AT THE MEETING EARLIER IN
PERSON.
I WIKE TO POINT OUT TO
THE RUDE CALLER WHO EARLIER
STATED THAT CERTAIN RESIDENTS
COMMENTS SHOULD BE IGNORED DUE
TO THEIR PERCEIVED WEALTH THAT
WE WOULD JUST LEAVE AND NEVER
WATCH THE REST OF THE MEETING
WHERE THE WORK IS BEING DONE.
GUESS WHAT?
SPOILER ALERT SOME OF US ARE
STILL HERE BECAUSE WE CARE.
I WAS SHOCKED TO SEE THAT OVER
AFTER OVER ONE YEAR INTO THE
PLANNING PROCESS YOU'RE JUST
NOW RECEIVING A LOT OF REPORT
THERE IS THIS REPORT AND HOW
CAN THE PUBLIC SEE IT?
YOU'RE JUST HEARING FOR THE
FIRST TIME THAT INFRASTRUCTURE
SUCH AS WATER IS LIMITED AND
YOU WONDER WHY THE PUBLIC IS
CONCERNED AND WE WENT AND DID
OUR OWN RESEARCH.
SECOND, I WAS ASTOUNDED TO HEAR
COMMISSIONER WISCH SAY TWICE
THAT NOBODY TOLD THE COMMISSION
WHAT THE GROWTH OF ANN ARBOR
SHOULD BE EXACTLY.
YOU HAVE NO BASIS FOR YOUR
NUMBERS.
THAT IS NOT PROPER PLANNING.
AT LEAST SOME OF YOU HAVE
DEGREES IN THIS AND YOU SHOULD
KNOW THAT YOU CAN'T JUST MAKE
THIS UP.
THE PUBLIC IS NOT GOING TO LET
YOU.
WHY DO YOU THINK AN EDUCATED
PUBLIC WOULD BUY THIS?
AND IF COMMISSIONER BUSH THINKS
THAT HOUSEHOLD STARTS ARE MORE
IMPORTANT DATA THAN SOME
NUMBERS AND WHY IS THERE
NOTHING IN THE DRAFT PLAN ABOUT
HOUSEHOLD STARTS HOUSEHOLD
FORMATION THAT TERM IS NEVER
MENTIONED.
SHE RATTLED OFF AN INTEL REPORT
AT THE BEGINNING OF THE MEETING
OF THE IMPORTANCE OF THOSE
NUMBERS TONIGHT.
BUT FUNNY NOBODY EVER HEARD
ANYTHING ABOUT THEM UNTIL THE
PLANS MADE UP POPULATION
FORECAST NUMBERS WERE
QUESTIONED AND I REALLY
COULDN'T BELIEVE MY EARS WHEN I
HEARD YOU SAY THAT TRASH PICKUP
IS A TRADE OFF FOR DEVELOPMENT,
ARE YOU ACTUALLY GOING TO TURN
US INTO NEW YORK CITY WHERE THE
GARBAGE IS DUMPED ON TO THE
SIDEWALK OVERNIGHT AND PICKED
UP BY A PERSON BY HAND THAT IS
NOT THE FUTURE.
THAT'S THE PAST CENTURY.
MANHATTAN IS STRUGGLING WITH
THIS NOW BECAUSE THEY THREW OUT
THE ORIGINAL CITY PLANS FOR
ALLEYS AND BACK BUILDINGS AND
USE THAT SPACE FOR BIGGER
BUILDINGS INSTEAD.
NOW THEY HAVE TO TAKE AWAY
STREET PARKING OR USE BIKE
LANES FOR TRASH DUMPSTERS.
APARTMENT BUILDINGS NOW HAVE
OVERFLOWING TRASH ROOMS FOR
AMAZON BOXES PILE UP.
THEY FINALLY SWITCHED TO
DUMPSTERS AFTER USING BAGS ON
THE SIDEWALK FOR YEARS THAT
ATTRACTED RATS AND BLOCKED
PEDESTRIANS.
THERE HAS BEEN A WHOLE SERIES
OF ARTICLES IN THE NEW YORK
TIMES ABOUT THIS RECENTLY DON'T
MAKE THESE MISTAKES.
YOU SHOULD BE REQUIRING
BUILDING TO HAVE A PLACE FOR
TRASH AND PICK UP ON SITE.
IT'S AN INTERNAL PROBLEM.
IT'S NOT GOING AWAY AND YOU'RE
TREATING IT LIKE AN
AFTERTHOUGHT.
THANK YOU.
>> BECAUSE YOU HAVE THREE
MINUTES TO ADDRESS THE
QUESTIONS.
>> THANK YOU, MR. MEINERT.
AND THANK YOU ONCE AGAIN TO THE
CITY PLANNING COMMISSION.
LUIS VASQUEZ NINE ZERO NINE
PARDON DRIVE IN UPPER LOWER
TONE.
YEAH I WOULD BE A LITTLE LEERY
OF SELF-APPOINTED EXPERTS
TALKING ABOUT FEAR MONGERING OR
DESCRIBING OR DEFINING THEIR
THEIR TERM OF FEAR MONGERING.
I REALLY KNOW I MEAN WHERE DO I
START THE
THE PERSON WHO YOU
KNOW, JUST MADE THE COMMENT
ABOUT FEAR MONGERING IS A VERY
WEALTHY BOARD AND HAS YOU JUST
MULTIPLE PROPERTIES AND TALKED
AS IF HIS OPINION OUTWEIGHS
OTHERS OPINIONS AND AND HE
TALKS ABOUT THINGS AS BEING A
FOREGONE CONCLUSION LIKE THESE
WILL BE THE RESULT OF THE KIND
OF REASONING THAT ARE BEING
CONTEMPLATED BY THIS BODY.
WELL, I WISH THAT FOLKS LIKE
HIM WOULD STATE THEIR THEIR
OPINIONS AS OPINIONS AND NOT AS
FACT.
>> AND I'M HAPPY TO HEAR THAT
AT LEAST ONE NIMBY STAYED TILL
THE END OF THE MEETING.
SO THANK YOU VERY MUCH FOR YOUR
EFFORTS AND CARRY ON.
THANK YOU.
NO ADDITIONAL HANDWROTE
STENMARK NAGO TEL AVIV ONE ONE
ONE ONE.
YOU CAN TRUST OUR SYSTEM AND
ADDRESS THE COMMISSION FOR
THREE MINUTES.
>> GO AHEAD.
HELLO.
GO AHEAD.
OK ALL RIGHT.
THANK YOU.
THIS IS STACEY HA A FEW
THOUSAND FOR EXCELLENT AND
BORDERFREE CAN YOU GUYS HEAR ME
OK WE CAN THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
I HAVEN'T DONE THAT COLUMN
BEFORE I WANT TO THANK YOU GUYS
ALL FOR ALL YOUR EFFORT.
I WE SPEND A LOT OF CONCERN AND
THE ONES ONCE YOU PLANTED ON
OBVIOUSLY MEETING AND PREVIOUS
MEETING ALL THE EMAILS YOU
RECEIVED THE CLEAR, CLEAR,
CLEAR THAT A LOT OF PEOPLE HAVE
I PERSONALLY HAVE OBSERVED THAT
THERE ARE VERY FEW PEOPLE WHO
ARE AGAINST INCREASING DENSITY
OR HAVING MORE AFFORDABLE IF
RATHER THE METHOD TO GET TO THE
POINT.
>> THE BOTTOM LINE IS THAT
THERE IS A REASONABLE BELIEF
THAT THIS PLAN AT CURRENTLY
DRAFTED WILL ACTUALLY DO WHAT
YOU WANTED TO SAY THAT AGAIN
THERE'S REASONABLE DOUBT THAT
THIS PLAN WILL WORK.
FOR EXAMPLE, PLANNING
COMMISSIONER HAVE ADMITTED THAT
THE FACT THAT YOU CAN DO IS
HOPE THAT THE BETTER THAT YOU
CAN DO WITH INCREASING HOUSING
YOU WILL SLOW INCREASING
HOUSING COSTS OF THE HOUSING
COSTS GO UP.
THEY'LL GO UP MORE SLOWLY.
THAT DOESN'T NECESSARILY MEAN
THEN THAT THE NURSE, THE
FIREFIGHTER, THE TEACHER WILL
SUDDENLY BE ABLE TO AFFORD A
HOUSE AS YOU'VE ONLY SLOWED THE
INCREASE DID NOT ACTUALLY
REDUCE THEM AGAIN IF PEOPLE
OF OF WHAT CONCERNED THEIR PLAN
WOULD BE ABSOLUTELY HORRIFIC IF
WE TOOK YEARS MAKE IRREVOCABLE
CHANGES TO OUR NEIGHBORHOODS
AND START TO THE GOAL MXIMA AS
WRITTEN THERE'S TOO MUCH BUT
THAT'S UP TO THE DEVELOPERS TO
GUARANTEE A VARIETY OF RENTABLE
APPROACHES FOR HOUSING FOR THE
NEEDS OF FUTURE RESIDENTS.
I'D SUGGEST THAT YOU HONESTLY
AND THOROUGHLY REVIEW THE DATA
AND THE RESEARCH IN A 50 PAGE
MEMO THAT YOU SHOULD PAY FROM
CITY AND RESIDENT COMBINED I'M
SORRY FROM COMBINED
NEIGHBORHOOD NEIGHBORHOOD
ASSOCIATION FROM ALL ACROSS THE
CITY.
I KNOW THAT COMMISSIONER
HAMMERSCHMIDT ALSO RECOMMENDED
THAT WE NEED TO MAKE SURE THAT
WE'RE LOOKING AT A VARIETY
OF DATA NOT PICKING AND
CHOOSING ONE BUT WE WANT TO SEE
IF WE REALLY WANT TO BE
COMPREHENSIVE IN ALL OF THE
DATA.
THANK YOU.
MANY HAVE URGED YOU TO PLAN.
IT DOES NOT MEAN CANCEL THE
PLAN AND IT DOES NOT MEAN WE
DON'T WANT TO PLAN BUT IT MEANS
IF WE WANT TO PLAN WITH MORE
ASSURANCE THAT THE COMMON
OBJECTIVES WILL BE MET BUT
PLEASE CONSIDER OPPOSING THE
PLAN SO THAT WE CAN GET BACK TO
WORK FOR EVERYBODY IN ANOTHER.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH FOR YOUR
TIME AND I HOPE YOU ALL GET A
GOOD NIGHT'S SLEEP.
>> THANK NOT US SEEING NO OTHER
COLORS I WILL CLOSE THE PUBLIC
COMMENTS AND MOVE TO ITEM
NUMBER OF COMMISSION PROPOSED
.
I DO WANT TO NOTE FOR THE LAST
CALLER OUR REPORT IS IT'S IN
THE MAY SIX AGENDA I BELIEVE
IT'S UNDER POINT TEN AND IT IS
AN ATTACHMENT AND YOU CAN
OBTAIN IT THERE.
>> I JUST HAVE A QUESTION.
WE'VE RECEIVED MANY
COMMUNICATIONS THIS WEEK ABOUT
REQUESTING EXPEDITED PROCESS
FOR COMMUNITY LAND TRUST AND I
WONDERED IF YOU COULD PROVIDE
THOSE PEOPLE SOME INFORMATION
ABOUT IN US WHETHER THAT IS
SOMETHING THAT'S POSSIBLE.
IS THERE A PROCESS FOR
PETITIONING FOR THAT?
YES.
YEAH, WE'VE ANSWERED A LOT
OF INQUIRIES AND AS SOON AS THE
IN OUR WORKING INTEREST MAKES
ANY APPLICATION TO THE CITY, WE
CAN DEFINITELY START PROCESSING
THAT ZONING DOES TAKE TIME
BECAUSE BY STATE LAW IT HAS TO
GO THROUGH THE PLANNING
COMMISSION AND IT ALSO HAS TO
GO TO CITY COUNCIL.
SO BUT WE ARE ALWAYS INTERESTED
IN PROCESSING AS QUICKLY AS
POSSIBLE.
BUT NO APPLICATION HAS BEEN
SUBMITTED TODAY.
OK, I'M NOT AWARE THAT THERE'S
SUCH A THING IN OUR THAT WE
HAVE SUCH A THING CALLED
EXPEDITED PROCESS THAT YOU CAN
EITHER FOR PAPER THAT WE THAT
WE THAT THIS BODY HAS ANY
AUTHORITY TO OR DISCRETION TO
INFLUENCE THE SPEED OF THAT
PROCESS.
SO SORRY I BELIEVE THE STATE
LAW AND OUR ORDINANCE DON'T
PROVIDE ANY SORT OF BYPASSING
OF THOSE STEPS.
OK, THANKS.
I JUST WANTED THAT TO BE
COMMUNICATED TO PEOPLE THROUGH
LISTENING.
THANKS.
IS IT POSSIBLE JUST TO ALLOW TO
US.
>> SURE.
THANK YOU.
RIGHT WITH THAT WE WILL MOVE TO
AGENDA ITEM NUMBER 13
ADJOURNMENT MOVE BY
COMMISSIONER MILLS SECONDED BY
COMMISSIONER ADAMS.
ALL THOSE IN FAVOR SAY I A WE
ARE ADJOURNED